# Timaeus
Author: Plato
Category: 06_filosofia
Source: Gutenberg #1572
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:21:21.983287
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

TIMAEUS

      by Plato

      Translated by Benjamin Jowett


      Contents

 INTRODUCTION AND ANALYSIS.
 Section 1.
 Section 2.
 Section 3.
 Section 4.
 Section 5.
 Section 6.
 Section 7.
 Section 8.

 TIMAEUS




      INTRODUCTION AND ANALYSIS.

      Of all the writings of Plato the Timaeus is the most obscure and
      repulsive to the modern reader, and has nevertheless had the
      greatest influence over the ancient and mediaeval world. The
      obscurity arises in the infancy of physical science, out of the
      confusion of theological, mathematical, and physiological
      notions, out of the desire to conceive the whole of nature
      without any adequate knowledge of the parts, and from a greater
      perception of similarities which lie on the surface than of
      differences which are hidden from view. To bring sense under the
      control of reason; to find some way through the mist or labyrinth
      of appearances, either the highway of mathematics, or more
      devious paths suggested by the analogy of man with the world, and
      of the world with man; to see that all things have a cause and
      are tending towards an end—this is the spirit of the ancient
      physical philosopher. He has no notion of trying an experiment
      and is hardly capable of observing the curiosities of nature
      which are ‘tumbling out at his feet,’ or of interpreting even the
      most obvious of them. He is driven back from the nearer to the
      more distant, from particulars to generalities, from the earth to
      the stars. He lifts up his eyes to the heavens and seeks to guide
      by their motions his erring footsteps. But we neither appreciate
      the conditions of knowledge to which he was subjected, nor have
      the ideas which fastened upon his imagination the same hold upon
      us. For he is hanging between matter and mind; he is under the
      dominion at the same time both of sense and of abstractions; his
      impressions are taken almost at random from the outside of
      nature; he sees the light, but not the objects which are revealed
      by the light; and he brings into juxtaposition things which to us
      appear wide as the poles asunder, because he finds nothing
      between them. He passes abruptly from persons to ideas and
      numbers, and from ideas and numbers to persons,—from the heavens
      to man, from astronomy to physiology; he confuses, or rather does
      not distinguish, subject and object, first and final causes, and
      is dreaming of geometrical figures lost in a flux of sense. He
      contrasts the perfect movements of the heavenly bodies with the
      imperfect representation of them (Rep.), and he does not always
      require strict accuracy even in applications of number and figure
      (Rep.). His mind lingers around the forms of mythology, which he
      uses as symbols or translates into figures of speech. He has no
      implements of observation, such as the telescope or microscope;
      the great science of chemistry is a blank to him. It is only by
      an effort that the modern thinker can breathe the atmosphere of
      the ancient philosopher, or understand how, under such unequal
      conditions, he seems in many instances, by a sort of inspiration,
      to have anticipated the truth.

      The influence with the Timaeus has exercised upon posterity is
      due partly to a misunderstanding. In the supposed depths of this
      dialogue the Neo-Platonists found hidden meanings and connections
      with the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, and out of them they
      elicited doctrines quite at variance with the spirit of Plato.
      Believing that he was inspired by the Holy Ghost, or had received
      his wisdom from Moses, they seemed to find in his writings the
      Christian Trinity, the Word, the Church, the creation of the
      world in a Jewish sense, as they really found the personality of
      God or of mind, and the immortality of the soul. All religions
      and philosophies met and mingled in the schools of Alexandria,
      and the Neo-Platonists had a method of interpretation which could
      elicit any meaning out of any words. They were really incapable
      of distinguishing between the opinions of one philosopher and
      another— between Aristotle and Plato, or between the serious
      thoughts of Plato and his passing fancies. They were absorbed in
      his theology and were under the dominion of his name, while that
      which was truly great and truly characteristic in him, his effort
      to realize and connect abstractions, was not understood by them
      at all. Yet the genius of Plato and Greek philosophy reacted upon
      the East, and a Greek element of thought and language overlaid
      and partly reduced to order the chaos of Orientalism. And kindred
      spirits, like St. Augustine, even though they were acquainted
      with his writings only through the medium of a Latin translation,
      were profoundly affected by them, seeming to find ‘God and his
      word everywhere insinuated’ in them (August. Confess.)

      There is no danger of the modern commentators on the Timaeus
      falling into the absurdities of the Neo-Platonists. In the
      present day we are well aware that an ancient philosopher is to
      be interpreted from himself and by the contemporary history of
      thought. We know that mysticism is not criticism. The fancies of
      the Neo-Platonists are only interesting to us because they
      exhibit a phase of the human mind which prevailed widely in the
      first centuries of the Christian era, and is not wholly extinct
      in our own day. But they have nothing to do with the
      interpretation of Plato, and in spirit they are opposed to him.
      They are the feeble expression of an age which has lost the power
      not only of creating great works, but of understanding them. They
      are the spurious birth of a marriage between philosophy and
      tradition, between Hellas and the East—(Greek) (Rep.). Whereas
      the so-called mysticism of Plato is purely Greek, arising out of
      his imperfect knowledge and high aspirations, and is the growth
      of an age in which philosophy is not wholly separated from poetry
      and mythology.

      A greater danger with modern interpreters of Plato is the
      tendency to regard the Timaeus as the centre of his system. We do
      not know how Plato would have arranged his own dialogues, or
      whether the thought of arranging any of them, besides the two
      ‘Trilogies’ which he has expressly connected; was ever present to
      his mind. But, if he had arranged them, there are many
      indications that this is not the place which he would have
      assigned to the Timaeus. We observe, first of all, that the
      dialogue is put into the mouth of a Pythagorean philosopher, and
      not of Socrates. And this is required by dramatic propriety; for
      the investigation of nature was expressly renounced by Socrates
      in the Phaedo. Nor does Plato himself attribute any importance to
      his guesses at science. He is not at all absorbed by them, as he
      is by the IDEA of good. He is modest and hesitating, and
      confesses that his words partake of the uncertainty of the
      subject (Tim.). The dialogue is primarily concerned with the
      animal creation, including under this term the heavenly bodies,
      and with man only as one among the animals. But we can hardly
      suppose that Plato would have preferred the study of nature to
      man, or that he would have deemed the formation of the world and
      the human frame to have the same interest which he ascribes to
      the mystery of being and not-being, or to the great political
      problems which he discusses in the Republic and the Laws. There
      are no speculations on physics in the other dialogues of Plato,
      and he himself regards the consideration of them as a rational
      pastime only. He is beginning to feel the need of further
      divisions of knowledge; and is becoming aware that besides
      dialectic, mathematics, and the arts, there is another field
      which has been hitherto unexplored by him. But he has not as yet
      defined this intermediate territory which lies somewhere between
      medicine and mathematics, and he would have felt that there was
      as great an impiety in ranking theories of physics first in the
      order of knowledge, as in placing the body before the soul.

      It is true, however, that the Timaeus is by no means confined to
      speculations on physics. The deeper foundations of the Platonic
      philosophy, such as the nature of God, the distinction of the
      sensible and intellectual, the great original conceptions of time
      and space, also appear in it. They are found principally in the
      first half of the dialogue. The construction of the heavens is
      for the most part ideal; the cyclic year serves as the connection
      between the world of absolute being and of generation, just as
      the number of population in the Republic is the expression or
      symbol of the transition from the ideal to the actual state. In
      some passages we are uncertain whether we are reading a
      description of astronomical facts or contemplating processes of
      the human mind, or of that divine mind (Phil.) which in Plato is
      hardly separable from it. The characteristics of man are
      transferred to the world-animal, as for example when intelligence
      and knowledge are said to be perfected by the circle of the Same,
      and true opinion by the circle of the Other; and conversely the
      motions of the world-animal reappear in man; its amorphous state
      continues in the child, and in both disorder and chaos are
      gradually succeeded by stability and order. It is not however to
      passages like these that Plato is referring when he speaks of the
      uncertainty of his subject, but rather to the composition of
      bodies, to the relations of colours, the nature of diseases, and
      the like, about which he truly feels the lamentable ignorance
      prevailing in his own age.

      We are led by Plato himself to regard the Timaeus, not as the
      centre or inmost shrine of the edifice, but as a detached
      building in a different style, framed, not after the Socratic,
      but after some Pythagorean model. As in the Cratylus and
      Parmenides, we are uncertain whether Plato is expressing his own
      opinions, or appropriating and perhaps improving the
      philosophical speculations of others. In all three dialogues he
      is exerting his dramatic and imitative power; in the Cratylus
      mingling a satirical and humorous purpose with true principles of
      language; in the Parmenides overthrowing Megarianism by a sort of
      ultra-Megarianism, which discovers contradictions in the one as
      great as those which have been previously shown to exist in the
      ideas. There is a similar uncertainty about the Timaeus; in the
      first part he scales the heights of transcendentalism, in the
      latter part he treats in a bald and superficial manner of the
      functions and diseases of the human frame. He uses the thoughts
      and almost the words of Parmenides when he discourses of being
      and of essence, adopting from old religion into philosophy the
      conception of God, and from the Megarians the IDEA of good. He
      agrees with Empedocles and the Atomists in attributing the
      greater differences of kinds to the figures of the elements and
      their movements into and out of one another. With Heracleitus, he
      acknowledges the perpetual flux; like Anaxagoras, he asserts the
      predominance of mind, although admitting an element of necessity
      which reason is incapable of subduing; like the Pythagoreans he
      supposes the mystery of the world to be contained in number.
      Many, if not all the elements of the Pre-Socratic philosophy are
      included in the Timaeus. It is a composite or eclectic work of
      imagination, in which Plato, without naming them, gathers up into
      a kind of system the various elements of philosophy which
      preceded him.

      If we allow for the difference of subject, and for some growth in
      Plato’s own mind, the discrepancy between the Timaeus and the
      other dialogues will not appear to be great. It is probable that
      the relation of the ideas to God or of God to the world was
      differently conceived by him at different times of his life. In
      all his later dialogues we observe a tendency in him to personify
      mind or God, and he therefore naturally inclines to view creation
      as the work of design. The creator is like a human artist who
      frames in his mind a plan which he executes by the help of his
      servants. Thus the language of philosophy which speaks of first
      and second causes is crossed by another sort of phraseology: ‘God
      made the world because he was good, and the demons ministered to
      him.’ The Timaeus is cast in a more theological and less
      philosophical mould than the other dialogues, but the same
      general spirit is apparent; there is the same dualism or
      opposition between the ideal and actual—the soul is prior to the
      body, the intelligible and unseen to the visible and corporeal.
      There is the same distinction between knowledge and opinion which
      occurs in the Theaetetus and Republic, the same enmity to the
      poets, the same combination of music and gymnastics. The doctrine
      of transmigration is still held by him, as in the Phaedrus and
      Republic; and the soul has a view of the heavens in a prior state
      of being. The ideas also remain, but they have become types in
      nature, forms of men, animals, birds, fishes. And the attribution
      of evil to physical causes accords with the doctrine which he
      maintains in the Laws respecting the involuntariness of vice.

      The style and plan of the Timaeus differ greatly from that of any
      other of the Platonic dialogues. The language is weighty, abrupt,
      and in some passages sublime. But Plato has not the same mastery
      over his instrument which he exhibits in the Phaedrus or
      Symposium. Nothing can exceed the beauty or art of the
      introduction, in which he is using words after his accustomed
      manner. But in the rest of the work the power of language seems
      to fail him, and the dramatic form is wholly given up. He could
      write in one style, but not in another, and the Greek language
      had not as yet been fashioned by any poet or philosopher to
      describe physical phenomena. The early physiologists had
      generally written in verse; the prose writers, like Democritus
      and Anaxagoras, as far as we can judge from their fragments,
      never attained to a periodic style. And hence we find the same
      sort of clumsiness in the Timaeus of Plato which characterizes
      the philosophical poem of Lucretius. There is a want of flow and
      often a defect of rhythm; the meaning is sometimes obscure, and
      there is a greater use of apposition and more of repetition than
      occurs in Plato’s earlier writings. The sentences are less
      closely connected and also more involved; the antecedents of
      demonstrative and relative pronouns are in some cases remote and
      perplexing. The greater frequency of participles and of absolute
      constructions gives the effect of heaviness. The descriptive
      portion of the Timaeus retains traces of the first Greek prose
      composition; for the great master of language was speaking on a
      theme with which he was imperfectly acquainted, and had no words
      in which to express his meaning. The rugged grandeur of the
      opening discourse of Timaeus may be compared with the more
      harmonious beauty of a similar passage in the Phaedrus.

      To the same cause we may attribute the want of plan. Plato had
      not the command of his materials which would have enabled him to
      produce a perfect work of art. Hence there are several new
      beginnings and resumptions and formal or artificial connections;
      we miss the ‘callida junctura’ of the earlier dialogues. His
      speculations about the Eternal, his theories of creation, his
      mathematical anticipations, are supplemented by desultory remarks
      on the one immortal and the two mortal souls of man, on the
      functions of the bodily organs in health and disease, on sight,
      hearing, smell, taste, and touch. He soars into the heavens, and
      then, as if his wings were suddenly clipped, he walks
      ungracefully and with difficulty upon the earth. The greatest
      things in the world, and the least things in man, are brought
      within the compass of a short treatise. But the intermediate
      links are missing, and we cannot be surprised that there should
      be a want of unity in a work which embraces astronomy, theology,
      physiology, and natural philosophy in a few pages.

      It is not easy to determine how Plato’s cosmos may be presented
      to the reader in a clearer and shorter form; or how we may supply
      a thread of connexion to his ideas without giving greater
      consistency to them than they possessed in his mind, or adding on
      consequences which would never have occurred to him. For he has
      glimpses of the truth, but no comprehensive or perfect vision.
      There are isolated expressions about the nature of God which have
      a wonderful depth and power; but we are not justified in assuming
      that these had any greater significance to the mind of Plato than
      language of a neutral and impersonal character... With a view to
      the illustration of the Timaeus I propose to divide this
      Introduction into sections, of which the first will contain an
      outline of the dialogue: (2) I shall consider the aspects of
      nature which presented themselves to Plato and his age, and the
      elements of philosophy which entered into the conception of them:
      (3) the theology and physics of the Timaeus, including the soul
      of the world, the conception of time and space, and the
      composition of the elements: (4) in the fourth section I shall
      consider the Platonic astronomy, and the position of the earth.
      There will remain, (5) the psychology, (6) the physiology of
      Plato, and (7) his analysis of the senses to be briefly commented
      upon: (8) lastly, we may examine in what points Plato approaches
      or anticipates the discoveries of modern science.




      Section 1.


      Socrates begins the Timaeus with a summary of the Republic. He
      lightly touches upon a few points,—the division of labour and
      distribution of the citizens into classes, the double nature and
      training of the guardians, the community of property and of women
      and children. But he makes no mention of the second education, or
      of the government of philosophers.

      And now he desires to see the ideal State set in motion; he would
      like to know how she behaved in some great struggle. But he is
      unable to invent such a narrative himself; and he is afraid that
      the poets are equally incapable; for, although he pretends to
      have nothing to say against them, he remarks that they are a
      tribe of imitators, who can only describe what they have seen.
      And he fears that the Sophists, who are plentifully supplied with
      graces of speech, in their erratic way of life having never had a
      city or house of their own, may through want of experience err in
      their conception of philosophers and statesmen. ‘And therefore to
      you I turn, Timaeus, citizen of Locris, who are at once a
      philosopher and a statesman, and to you, Critias, whom all
      Athenians know to be similarly accomplished, and to Hermocrates,
      who is also fitted by nature and education to share in our
      discourse.’

      HERMOCRATES: ‘We will do our best, and have been already
      preparing; for on our way home, Critias told us of an ancient
      tradition, which I wish, Critias, that you would repeat to
      Socrates.’ ‘I will, if Timaeus approves.’ ‘I approve.’ Listen
      then, Socrates, to a tale of Solon’s, who, being the friend of
      Dropidas my great-grandfather, told it to my grandfather Critias,
      and he told me. The narrative related to ancient famous actions
      of the Athenian people, and to one especially, which I will
      rehearse in honour of you and of the goddess. Critias when he
      told this tale of the olden time, was ninety years old, I being
      not more than ten. The occasion of the rehearsal was the day of
      the Apaturia called the Registration of Youth, at which our
      parents gave prizes for recitation. Some poems of Solon were
      recited by the boys. They had not at that time gone out of
      fashion, and the recital of them led some one to say, perhaps in
      compliment to Critias, that Solon was not only the wisest of men
      but also the best of poets. The old man brightened up at hearing
      this, and said: Had Solon only had the leisure which was required
      to complete the famous legend which he brought with him from
      Egypt he would have been as distinguished as Homer and Hesiod.
      ‘And what was the subject of the poem?’ said the person who made
      the remark. The subject was a very noble one; he described the
      most famous action in which the Athenian people were ever
      engaged. But the memory of their exploits has passed away owing
      to the lapse of time and the extinction of the actors. ‘Tell us,’
      said the other, ‘the whole story, and where Solon heard the
      story.’ He replied—There is at the head of the Egyptian Delta,
      where the river Nile divides, a city and district called Sais;
      the city was the birthplace of King Amasis, and is under the
      protection of the goddess Neith or Athene. The citizens have a
      friendly feeling towards the Athenians, believing themselves to
      be related to them. Hither came Solon, and was received with
      honour; and here he first learnt, by conversing with the Egyptian
      priests, how ignorant he and his countrymen were of antiquity.
      Perceiving this, and with the view of eliciting information from
      them, he told them the tales of Phoroneus and Niobe, and also of
      Deucalion and Pyrrha, and he endeavoured to count the generations
      which had since passed. Thereupon an aged priest said to him: ‘O
      Solon, Solon, you Hellenes are ever young, and there is no old
      man who is a Hellene.’ ‘What do you mean?’ he asked. ‘In mind,’
      replied the priest, ‘I mean to say that you are children; there
      is no opinion or tradition of knowledge among you which is white
      with age; and I will tell you why. Like the rest of mankind you
      have suffered from convulsions of nature, which are chiefly
      brought about by the two great agencies of fire and water. The
      former is symbolized in the Hellenic tale of young Phaethon who
      drove his father’s horses the wrong way, and having burnt up the
      earth was himself burnt up by a thunderbolt. For there occurs at
      long intervals a derangement of the heavenly bodies, and then the
      earth is destroyed by fire. At such times, and when fire is the
      agent, those who dwell by rivers or on the seashore are safer
      than those who dwell upon high and dry places, who in their turn
      are safer when the danger is from water. Now the Nile is our
      saviour from fire, and as there is little rain in Egypt, we are
      not harmed by water; whereas in other countries, when a deluge
      comes, the inhabitants are swept by the rivers into the sea. The
      memorials which your own and other nations have once had of the
      famous actions of mankind perish in the waters at certain
      periods; and the rude survivors in the mountains begin again,
      knowing nothing of the world before the flood. But in Egypt the
      traditions of our own and other lands are by us registered for
      ever in our temples. The genealogies which you have recited to us
      out of your own annals, Solon, are a mere children’s story. For
      in the first place, you remember one deluge only, and there were
      many of them, and you know nothing of that fairest and noblest
      race of which you are a seed or remnant. The memory of them was
      lost, because there was no written voice among you. For in the
      times before the great flood Athens was the greatest and best of
      cities and did the noblest deeds and had the best constitution of
      any under the face of heaven.’ Solon marvelled, and desired to be
      informed of the particulars. ‘You are welcome to hear them,’ said
      the priest, ‘both for your own sake and for that of the city, and
      above all for the sake of the goddess who is the common foundress
      of both our cities. Nine thousand years have elapsed since she
      founded yours, and eight thousand since she founded ours, as our
      annals record. Many laws exist among us which are the counterpart
      of yours as they were in the olden time. I will briefly describe
      them to you, and you shall read the account of them at your
      leisure in the sacred registers. In the first place, there was a
      caste of priests among the ancient Athenians, and another of
      artisans; also castes of shepherds, hunters, and husbandmen, and
      lastly of warriors, who, like the warriors of Egypt, were
      separated from the rest, and carried shields and spears, a custom
      which the goddess first taught you, and then the Asiatics, and we
      among Asiatics first received from her. Observe again, what care
      the law took in the pursuit of wisdom, searching out the deep
      things of the world, and applying them to the use of man. The
      spot of earth which the goddess chose had the best of climates,
      and produced the wisest men; in no other was she herself, the
      philosopher and warrior goddess, so likely to have votaries. And
      there you dwelt as became the children of the gods, excelling all
      men in virtue, and many famous actions are recorded of you. The
      most famous of them all was the overthrow of the island of
      Atlantis. This great island lay over against the Pillars of
      Heracles, in extent greater than Libya and Asia put together, and
      was the passage to other islands and to a great ocean of which
      the Mediterranean sea was only the harbour; and within the
      Pillars the empire of Atlantis reached in Europe to Tyrrhenia and
      in Libya to Egypt. This mighty power was arrayed against Egypt
      and Hellas and all the countries bordering on the Mediterranean.
      Then your city did bravely, and won renown over the whole earth.
      For at the peril of her own existence, and when the other
      Hellenes had deserted her, she repelled the invader, and of her
      own accord gave liberty to all the nations within the Pillars. A
      little while afterwards there were great earthquakes and floods,
      and your warrior race all sank into the earth; and the great
      island of Atlantis also disappeared in the sea. This is the
      explanation of the shallows which are found in that part of the
      Atlantic ocean.’

      Such was the tale, Socrates, which Critias heard from Solon; and
      I noticed when listening to you yesterday, how close the
      resemblance was between your city and citizens and the ancient
      Athenian State. But I would not speak at the time, because I
      wanted to refresh my memory. I had heard the old man when I was a
      child, and though I could not remember the whole of our
      yesterday’s discourse, I was able to recall every word of this,
      which is branded into my mind; and I am prepared, Socrates, to
      rehearse to you the entire narrative. The imaginary State which
      you were describing may be identified with the reality of Solon,
      and our antediluvian ancestors may be your citizens. ‘That is
      excellent, Critias, and very appropriate to a Panathenaic
      festival; the truth of the story is a great advantage.’ Then now
      let me explain to you the order of our entertainment; first,
      Timaeus, who is a natural philosopher, will speak of the origin
      of the world, going down to the creation of man, and then I shall
      receive the men whom he has created, and some of whom will have
      been educated by you, and introduce them to you as the lost
      Athenian citizens of whom the Egyptian record spoke. As the law
      of Solon prescribes, we will bring them into court and
      acknowledge their claims to citizenship. ‘I see,’ replied
      Socrates, ‘that I shall be well entertained; and do you, Timaeus,
      offer up a prayer and begin.’

      TIMAEUS: All men who have any right feeling, at the beginning of
      any enterprise, call upon the Gods; and he who is about to speak
      of the origin of the universe has a special need of their aid.
      May my words be acceptable to them, and may I speak in the manner
      which will be most intelligible to you and will best express my
      own meaning!

      First, I must distinguish between that which always is and never
      becomes and which is apprehended by reason and reflection, and
      that which always becomes and never is and is conceived by
      opinion with the help of sense. All that becomes and is created
      is the work of a cause, and that is fair which the artificer
      makes after an eternal pattern, but whatever is fashioned after a
      created pattern is not fair. Is the world created or
      uncreated?—that is the first question. Created, I reply, being
      visible and tangible and having a body, and therefore sensible;
      and if sensible, then created; and if created, made by a cause,
      and the cause is the ineffable father of all things, who had
      before him an eternal archetype. For to imagine that the
      archetype was created would be blasphemy, seeing that the world
      is the noblest of creations, and God is the best of causes. And
      the world being thus created according to the eternal pattern is
      the copy of something; and we may assume that words are akin to
      the matter of which they speak. What is spoken of the unchanging
      or intelligible must be certain and true; but what is spoken of
      the created image can only be probable; being is to becoming what
      truth is to belief. And amid the variety of opinions which have
      arisen about God and the nature of the world we must be content
      to take probability for our rule, considering that I, who am the
      speaker, and you, who are the judges, are only men; to
      probability we may attain but no further.

      SOCRATES: Excellent, Timaeus, I like your manner of approaching
      the subject—proceed.

      TIMAEUS: Why did the Creator make the world?...He was good, and
      therefore not jealous, and being free from jealousy he desired
      that all things should be like himself. Wherefore he set in order
      the visible world, which he found in disorder. Now he who is the
      best could only create the fairest; and reflecting that of
      visible things the intelligent is superior to the unintelligent,
      he put intelligence in soul and soul in body, and framed the
      universe to be the best and fairest work in the order of nature,
      and the world became a living soul through the providence of God.

      In the likeness of what animal was the world made?—that is the
      third question...The form of the perfect animal was a whole, and
      contained all intelligible beings, and the visible animal, made
      after the pattern of this, included all visible creatures.

      Are there many worlds or one only?—that is the fourth
      question...One only. For if in the original there had been more
      than one they would have been the parts of a third, which would
      have been the true pattern of the world; and therefore there is,
      and will ever be, but one created world. Now that which is
      created is of necessity corporeal and visible and
      tangible,—visible and therefore made of fire,—tangible and
      therefore solid and made of earth. But two terms must be united
      by a third, which is a mean between them; and had the earth been
      a surface only, one mean would have sufficed, but two means are
      required to unite solid bodies. And as the world was composed of
      solids, between the elements of fire and earth God placed two
      other elements of air and water, and arranged them in a
      continuous proportion—

      fire:air::air:water, and air:water::water:earth,

      and so put together a visible and palpable heaven, having harmony
      and friendship in the union of the four elements; and being at
      unity with itself it was indissoluble except by the hand of the
      framer. Each of the elements was taken into the universe whole
      and entire; for he considered that the animal should be perfect
      and one, leaving no remnants out of which another animal could be
      created, and should also be free from old age and disease, which
      are produced by the action of external forces. And as he was to
      contain all things, he was made in the all-containing form of a
      sphere, round as from a lathe and every way equidistant from the
      centre, as was natural and suitable to him. He was finished and
      smooth, having neither eyes nor ears, for there was nothing
      without him which he could see or hear; and he had no need to
      carry food to his mouth, nor was there air for him to breathe;
      and he did not require hands, for there was nothing of which he
      could take hold, nor feet, with which to walk. All that he did
      was done rationally in and by himself, and he moved in a circle
      turning within himself, which is the most intellectual of
      motions; but the other six motions were wanting to him; wherefore
      the universe had no feet or legs.

      And so the thought of God made a God in the image of a perfect
      body, having intercourse with himself and needing no other, but
      in every part harmonious and self-contained and truly blessed.
      The soul was first made by him—the elder to rule the younger; not
      in the order in which our wayward fancy has led us to describe
      them, but the soul first and afterwards the body. God took of the
      unchangeable and indivisible and also of the divisible and
      corporeal, and out of the two he made a third nature, essence,
      which was in a mean between them, and partook of the same and the
      other, the intractable nature of the other being compressed into
      the same. Having made a compound of all the three, he proceeded
      to divide the entire mass into portions related to one another in
      the ratios of 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27, and proceeded to fill up the
      double and triple intervals thus—

  - over 1, 4/3, 3/2, - over 2, 8/3, 3, - over 4, 16/3, 6,  - over 8:
  - over 1, 3/2, 2,   - over 3, 9/2, 6, - over 9, 27/2, 18, - over 27;

      in which double series of numbers are two kinds of means; the one
      exceeds and is exceeded by equal parts of the extremes, e.g. 1,
      4/3, 2; the other kind of mean is one which is equidistant from
      the extremes—2, 4, 6. In this manner there were formed intervals
      of thirds, 3:2, of fourths, 4:3, and of ninths, 9:8. And next he
      filled up the intervals of a fourth with ninths, leaving a
      remnant which is in the ratio of 256:243. The entire compound was
      divided by him lengthways into two parts, which he united at the
      centre like the letter X, and bent into an inner and outer circle
      or sphere, cutting one another again at a point over against the
      point at which they cross. The outer circle or sphere was named
      the sphere of the same—the inner, the sphere of the other or
      diverse; and the one revolved horizontally to the right, the
      other diagonally to the left. To the sphere of the same which was
      undivided he gave dominion, but the sphere of the other or
      diverse was distributed into seven unequal orbits, having
      intervals in ratios of twos and threes, three of either sort, and
      he bade the orbits move in opposite directions to one
      another—three of them, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, with equal
      swiftness, and the remaining four—the Moon, Saturn, Mars,
      Jupiter, with unequal swiftness to the three and to one another,
      but all in due proportion.

      When the Creator had made the soul he made the body within her;
      and the soul interfused everywhere from the centre to the
      circumference of heaven, herself turning in herself, began a
      divine life of rational and everlasting motion. The body of
      heaven is visible, but the soul is invisible, and partakes of
      reason and harmony, and is the best of creations, being the work
      of the best. And being composed of the same, the other, and the
      essence, these three, and also divided and bound in harmonical
      proportion, and revolving within herself—the soul when touching
      anything which has essence, whether divided or undivided, is
      stirred to utter the sameness or diversity of that and some other
      thing, and to tell how and when and where individuals are
      affected or related, whether in the world of change or of
      essence. When reason is in the neighbourhood of sense, and the
      circle of the other or diverse is moving truly, then arise true
      opinions and beliefs; when reason is in the sphere of thought,
      and the circle of the same runs smoothly, then intelligence is
      perfected.

      When the Father who begat the world saw the image which he had
      made of the Eternal Gods moving and living, he rejoiced; and in
      his joy resolved, since the archetype was eternal, to make the
      creature eternal as far as this was possible. Wherefore he made
      an image of eternity which is time, having an uniform motion
      according to number, parted into months and days and years, and
      also having greater divisions of past, present, and future. These
      all apply to becoming in time, and have no meaning in relation to
      the eternal nature, which ever is and never was or will be; for
      the unchangeable is never older or younger, and when we say that
      he ‘was’ or ‘will be,’ we are mistaken, for these words are
      applicable only to becoming, and not to true being; and equally
      wrong are we in saying that what has become IS become and that
      what becomes IS becoming, and that the non-existent IS
      non-existent...These are the forms of time which imitate eternity
      and move in a circle measured by number.

      Thus was time made in the image of the eternal nature; and it was
      created together with the heavens, in order that if they were
      dissolved, it might perish with them. And God made the sun and
      moon and five other wanderers, as they are called, seven in all,
      and to each of them he gave a body moving in an orbit, being one
      of the seven orbits into which the circle of the other was
      divided. He put the moon in the orbit which was nearest to the
      earth, the sun in that next, the morning star and Mercury in the
      orbits which move opposite to the sun but with equal
      swiftness—this being the reason why they overtake and are
      overtaken by one another. All these bodies became living
      creatures, and learnt their appointed tasks, and began to move,
      the nearer more swiftly, the remoter more slowly, according to
      the diagonal movement of the other. And since this was controlled
      by the movement of the same, the seven planets in their courses
      appeared to describe spirals; and that appeared fastest which was
      slowest, and that which overtook others appeared to be overtaken
      by them. And God lighted a fire in the second orbit from the
      earth which is called the sun, to give light over the whole
      heaven, and to teach intelligent beings that knowledge of number
      which is derived from the revolution of the same. Thus arose day
      and night, which are the periods of the most intelligent nature;
      a month is created by the revolution of the moon, a year by that
      of the sun. Other periods of wonderful length and complexity are
      not observed by men in general; there is moreover a cycle or
      perfect year at the completion of which they all meet and
      coincide...To this end the stars came into being, that the
      created heaven might imitate the eternal nature.

      Thus far the universal animal was made in the divine image, but
      the other animals were not as yet included in him. And God
      created them according to the patterns or species of them which
      existed in the divine original. There are four of them: one of
      gods, another of birds, a third of fishes, and a fourth of
      animals. The gods were made in the form of a circle, which is the
      most perfect figure and the figure of the universe. They were
      created chiefly of fire, that they might be bright, and were made
      to know and follow the best, and to be scattered over the
      heavens, of which they were to be the glory. Two kinds of motion
      were assigned to them—first, the revolution in the same and
      around the same, in peaceful unchanging thought of the same; and
      to this was added a forward motion which was under the control of
      the same. Thus then the fixed stars were created, being divine
      and eternal animals, revolving on the same spot, and the
      wandering stars, in their courses, were created in the manner
      already described. The earth, which is our nurse, clinging around
      the pole extended through the universe, he made to be the
      guardian and artificer of night and day, first and eldest of gods
      that are in the interior of heaven. Vain would be the labour of
      telling all the figures of them, moving as in dance, and their
      juxta-positions and approximations, and when and where and behind
      what other stars they appear to disappear—to tell of all this
      without looking at a plan of them would be labour in vain.

      The knowledge of the other gods is beyond us, and we can only
      accept the traditions of the ancients, who were the children of
      the gods, as they said; for surely they must have known their own
      ancestors. Although they give no proof, we must believe them as
      is customary. They tell us that Oceanus and Tethys were the
      children of Earth and Heaven; that Phoreys, Cronos, and Rhea came
      in the next generation, and were followed by Zeus and Here, whose
      brothers and children are known to everybody.

      When all of them, both those who show themselves in the sky, and
      those who retire from view, had come into being, the Creator
      addressed them thus:—‘Gods, sons of gods, my works, if I will,
      are indissoluble. That which is bound may be dissolved, but only
      an evil being would dissolve that which is harmonious and happy.
      And although you are not immortal you shall not die, for I will
      hold you together. Hear me, then:—Three tribes of mortal beings
      have still to be created, but if created by me they would be like
      gods. Do ye therefore make them; I will implant in them the seed
      of immortality, and you shall weave together the mortal and
      immortal, and provide food for them, and receive them again in
      death.’ Thus he spake, and poured the remains of the elements
      into the cup in which he had mingled the soul of the universe.
      They were no longer pure as before, but diluted; and the mixture
      he distributed into souls equal in number to the stars, and
      assigned each to a star—then having mounted them, as in a
      chariot, he showed them the nature of the universe, and told them
      of their future birth and human lot. They were to be sown in the
      planets, and out of them was to come forth the most religious of
      animals, which would hereafter be called man. The souls were to
      be implanted in bodies, which were in a perpetual flux, whence,
      he said, would arise, first, sensation; secondly, love, which is
      a mixture of pleasure and pain; thirdly, fear and anger, and the
      opposite affections: and if they conquered these, they would live
      righteously, but if they were conquered by them, unrighteously.
      He who lived well would return to his native star, and would
      there have a blessed existence; but, if he lived ill, he would
      pass into the nature of a woman, and if he did not then alter his
      evil ways, into the likeness of some animal, until the reason
      which was in him reasserted her sway over the elements of fire,
      air, earth, water, which had engrossed her, and he regained his
      first and better nature. Having given this law to his creatures,
      that he might be guiltless of their future evil, he sowed them,
      some in the earth, some in the moon, and some in the other
      planets; and he ordered the younger gods to frame human bodies
      for them and to make the necessary additions to them, and to
      avert from them all but self-inflicted evil.

      Having given these commands, the Creator remained in his own
      nature. And his children, receiving from him the immortal
      principle, borrowed from the world portions of earth, air, fire,
      water, hereafter to be returned, which they fastened together,
      not with the adamantine bonds which bound themselves, but by
      little invisible pegs, making each separate body out of all the
      elements, subject to influx and efflux, and containing the
      courses of the soul. These swelling and surging as in a river
      moved irregularly and irrationally in all the six possible ways,
      forwards, backwards, right, left, up and down. But violent as
      were the internal and alimentary fluids, the tide became still
      more violent when the body came into contact with flaming fire,
      or the solid earth, or gliding waters, or the stormy wind; the
      motions produced by these impulses pass through the body to the
      soul and have the name of sensations. Uniting with the
      ever-flowing current, they shake the courses of the soul,
      stopping the revolution of the same and twisting in all sorts of
      ways the nature of the other, and the harmonical ratios of twos
      and threes and the mean terms which connect them, until the
      circles are bent and disordered and their motion becomes
      irregular. You may imagine a position of the body in which the
      head is resting upon the ground, and the legs are in the air, and
      the top is bottom and the left right. And something similar
      happens when the disordered motions of the soul come into contact
      with any external thing; they say the same or the other in a
      manner which is the very opposite of the truth, and they are
      false and foolish, and have no guiding principle in them. And
      when external impressions enter in, they are really conquered,
      though they seem to conquer.

      By reason of these affections the soul is at first without
      intelligence, but as time goes on the stream of nutriment abates,
      and the courses of the soul regain their proper motion, and
      apprehend the same and the other rightly, and become rational.
      The soul of him who has education is whole and perfect and
      escapes the worst disease, but, if a man’s education be
      neglected, he walks lamely through life and returns good for
      nothing to the world below. This, however, is an after-stage—at
      present, we are only concerned with the creation of the body and
      soul.

      The two divine courses were encased by the gods in a sphere which
      is called the head, and is the god and lord of us. And to this
      they gave the body to be a vehicle, and the members to be
      instruments, having the power of flexion and extension. Such was
      the origin of legs and arms. In the next place, the gods gave a
      forward motion to the human body, because the front part of man
      was the more honourable and had authority. And they put in a face