# The Ego and the Id
Author: Sigmund Freud
Category: 05_psicologia
Source: Gutenberg #49445
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:20:15.839426
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

[Illustration:
  Copyright, Ewing Galloway]

_The drop forge. A fourteen-ton hydraulic press is employed in forging
                 an immense open hearth steel plate._




                        POPULAR SCIENCE LIBRARY

                            EDITOR-IN-CHIEF

                          GARRETT P. SERVISS

                                AUTHORS

          WILLIAM J. MILLER HIPPOLYTE GRUENER A. RUSSELL BOND
            D. W. HERING LOOMIS HAVEMEYER ERNEST G. MARTIN
              ARTHUR SELWYN-BROWN ROBERT CHENAULT GIVLER
                 ERNEST INGERSOLL WILFRED MASON BARTON
                  WILLIAM B. SCOTT ERNEST J. STREUBEL
                       NORMAN TAYLOR    DAVID TODD
                        CHARLES FITZHUGH TALMAN
                              ROBIN BEACH

                      ARRANGED IN SIXTEEN VOLUMES
                 WITH A HISTORY OF SCIENCE, GLOSSARIES
                          AND A GENERAL INDEX

                             _ILLUSTRATED_

[Illustration: LOGO]

                              VOLUME FIVE

                      P. F. COLLIER & SON COMPANY
                               NEW YORK




                            Copyright 1922
                    BY P. F. COLLIER & SON COMPANY

                       MANUFACTURED IN U. S. A.




                               MECHANICS

                       THE SCIENCE OF MACHINERY

                                  BY

                            A. RUSSELL BOND
             FORMERLY MANAGING EDITOR, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

[Illustration]

                      P. F. COLLIER & SON COMPANY
                               NEW YORK




PREFACE


ALTHOUGH strictly speaking the term “Mechanics” applies to that branch
of Physics that deals with the actions of forces on material bodies,
originally the word had a broader meaning embracing all machinery
and mechanical inventions. To-day popular usage is restoring to the
term its original broad interpretation, and it is in this popular but
rather unorthodox sense that “Mechanics” has been chosen as the title
of this book; for although certain elementary principles of mechanics
are described and explained, the major portion of the book deals with
machines and their evolution to their present stage of perfection.

Machines are man’s creation, and yet in a sense the man of to-day is a
machine product; for modern civilization owes its material and in large
measure its esthetic development to machinery. The story of machinery,
from primitive man’s first attempts to augment his physical powers with
mechanical aids down to the present era of gigantic, steel-muscled
machinery and marvelously intricate mechanisms, is the story of human
progress. It is this story that we have endeavored to tell in the
following pages, but the subject is too large to be covered in a single
volume or even a dozen volumes. Under the circumstances we have been
obliged to confine ourselves to a mere outline, selecting certain
avenues of progress more marked than others and presenting brief sketch
maps of them. We have aimed in this way to give a bird’s-eye view of
the whole story of human progress in things material.

The book has not been written for the mechanical engineer, but for the
layman who would learn of the mechanical contrivances that contribute
to his material welfare; hence technical terms have been avoided, as
far as possible, and where unavoidable have been explained and defined.

  A. RUSSELL BOND




                             CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                             PAGE

      I. TOOL-MAKING ANIMALS                            9
     II. THE ANATOMY OF A MACHINE                      20
    III. MACHINES FOR MAKING MACHINES                  42
     IV. COUNTING SECONDS                              57
      V. PUTTING RIVERS TO WORK                        75
     VI. LIQUID LEVERS AND GEARS                       94
    VII. AIR _vs._ WATER                              109
   VIII. AIR SPRINGS AND CUSHIONS                     126
     IX. POWER FROM HEAT                              139
      X. BURNING FUEL IN THE ENGINE CYLINDER          155
     XI. WHEN COAL AND OIL ARE EXHAUSTED              171
    XII. INVASION OF THE SEA                          182
   XIII. SLIDING, ROLLING, WALKING, AND CREEPING      203
    XIV. INVASION OF THE SKY                          219
     XV. HELPING THE FARMER                           239
    XVI. MACHINING THE EARTH                          251
   XVII. FROM FIBER TO FABRIC                         268
  XVIII. THE MAKING OF PAPER                          289
    XIX. TYPESETTING AND PRINTING MACHINERY           300
     XX. CAST IRON, WROUGHT IRON, AND STEEL           314
    XXI. ANIMATED MACHINERY                           326
   XXII. HEAT VACUUMS                                 345
  XXIII. ENGINES OF DESTRUCTION                       359
   XXIV. SUMMARY OF MECHANICAL PROGRESS               376




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  THE DROP FORGE--FORGING A STEEL PLATE             _Frontispiece_

                                                       FACING PAGE

  RAISING WATER WITH A CHAIN OF POTS--A PRIMITIVE
      PUMP USED IN EGYPT                                        32

  HORSE-OPERATED CHAIN PUMP USED IN GREECE                      32

  MULTIPLE SPINDLE DRILL IN A MOTOR CAR FACTORY                 33

  BUCKET OF A GIANT DREDGE WITH ITS JAWS WIDE OPEN              64

  GOLD DREDGE EATING ITS WAY THROUGH RIVER SANDS                65

  SUCTION DREDGE EXCAVATING A CHANNEL AND BUILDING NEW LAND     65

  AIR LOCK OF A PNEUMATIC CAISSON                               96

  SUBAQUEOUS TUNNEL SHOWING THE SHIELD IN THE BACKGROUND        97

  WHARF PROTECTED BY A PNEUMATIC BREAKWATER                    128

  SUN-POWER PLANT IN EGYPT                                     129

  CLOSE-UP OF ONE OF THE REFLECTORS OF A SUN-POWER PLANT       129

  GIANT CAPRONI HYDROAEROPLANE                                 160

  CONCRETE STEAMSHIP “FAITH”                                   161

  “VIRGINIAN,” THE LARGEST LOCOMOTIVE IN THE WORLD             161

  LOOM PROVIDED WITH A JACQUARD ATTACHMENT                     224

  BATTERY OF MULE SPINNING FRAMES                              225

  JACQUARD ATTACHMENT FOR LOOM                                 225

  DIGGING A TRENCH WITH A MACHINE OF THE CHAIN TYPE            256

  MULTIPLE PLOWING ON A WESTERN WHEAT FIELD                    257

  SAWING LOGS OF PULPWOOD INTO 16-INCH LENGTHS                 288

  HEATER IN A PULP MILL WHERE THE WOOD PULP IS MIXED WITH CLAY 288

  MODERN FOURDRINIER PAPER-MAKING MACHINES                     289

  MOLTEN METAL FROM A BLAST FURNACE                            320

  BESSEMER CONVERTER BLOWING AIR THROUGH A MASS OF MOLTEN IRON 320

  STEEL BEAM PASSING THROUGH THE FINISHING ROLLS               321

  COMPOSITOR AT WORK ON A LINOTYPE MACHINE                     352

  THE OPTOPHONE, WHICH ENABLES THE BLIND TO READ PRINT         353

  BLIND MAN READING WITH HIS EARS                              353




CHAPTER I

TOOL-MAKING ANIMALS


WHEN we review the marvelous achievements of modern civilization we
are quite willing to agree with the ancient psalmist that man is
“little lower than the angels.” But at the other end of the scale our
complacency is liable to receive a rude shock; apparently the boundary
between man and beast is not so very easy to draw.

We used to be told that one important superiority of mankind lies in
the fact that he makes use of tools, while the beast never uses any
implement except those that nature has furnished him as part of his own
organism. But a gorilla will throw stones at his enemy; and he knows
how to brandish a club and use it with telling force. Some of the apes
are known to use sticks to knock down fruit which is out of the reach
of their hands, and they will crack nuts with a stone. Clearly these
animals are tool users. A very intelligent orang-utan in the Bronx
Zoölogical Garden, New York, after trying for days to wrench off a
bracket from the wall of his cage eventually used the horizontal bar of
his trapeze as a lever and with it pried the offending bracket from its
fastenings. Here was real invention and the discovery of the principle
of leverage. The great black arara cockatoo of New Guinea uses his beak
as a saw to weaken the shells of hard nuts, and to keep his bill from
slipping off the smooth shell he is ingenious enough to wrap a leaf
around the nut to hold it steady.

Even in the insect world we find creatures resourceful enough to make
use of tools. Prof. Franz Doflein of the University of Breslau tells
of an interesting study of certain ants, known as the _Oecophylla
smaragdina_, who build their nests in bushes by fastening leaves
together with fine threads. But the ants that build the nests cannot
spin these threads, because they possess no spinning glands. They must
depend upon their larvæ for this product. When a rent was made in one
of these nests, a band of the tiny creatures ranged themselves side
by side along the torn edge of the leaf and reached across the gap
until they could catch hold of the opposite edge with their mandibles.
Then they drew back step by step, with perfect teamwork, until the two
edges were brought together. In the meantime, other ants had rushed to
the nursery and each one had picked up a larva, not with the idea of
bearing it off to safety, but in order that the babies might spin the
thread which the adult ants were unable to do. The larvæ were carried
to the breach in the nest and moved back and forth across the rent.
They were pressed first against one side of the tear and then the other
and all the while were squeezed tightly, evidently with the purpose of
making them spin. Gradually a fine silky web was woven across the torn
leaf and eventually the rent was completely patched.

Unquestionably these little ants are tool-using animals, because they
make their larvæ serve as spinning spindles and also as weavers’
shuttles. However, this can hardly be cited as a point in common with
even the lowest type of man, for the ants merely use the tools they
find at their disposal. They certainly cannot be credited with having
produced or even improved the tool which they use, whereas even in
the most primitive of men we find that the tools used are not only
carefully selected for the work to be performed, but are actually,
shaped, be it ever so crudely, to suit the job.

Clearly we must shift the boundary between man and beast,
distinguishing the former as the creature who artificially improves his
tools. But even here it is not absolutely certain that the boundary
will stand. Wilhelm Boelsche, a well-known German writer on natural
history, calls attention to the “blacksmith woodpecker” which will
thrust hard pine nuts into cracks in the trunk of a tree, so that they
are held as if in a vise, enabling the bird to operate upon the seed
more easily. Furthermore, this woodpecker will actually make a hole in
the tree to receive the nut if there is not a hole or crack handy, so
that evidently this animal does produce or artificially improve the
tool that it uses.

There are a few such examples in nature, just enough to cast a bit of
uncertainty on the boundary we have set. But although the actual line
of demarcation may not be clear, there is no question but that the
lowest type of humanity now existent, or of which we have any record,
is or was a tool maker. Chipped stones evidently fashioned by man
for some useful purpose are found even in the remains of the Middle
Tertiary Epoch. The spirit of inquiry, of experiment, of invention,
and the ambition to dominate over other members of the animal kingdom
or over the obstacles imposed by nature, are to be found more or less
active among all peoples, no matter how lowly a position they may
occupy in the scale of civilization.


WAR AS A STIMULUS OF INVENTION

The most primitive implements were probably developed for the purpose
of war. From the very earliest times, down to the present day, war
has been a most potent stimulus of invention. The first tools ever
used were probably intended to enable the user to cope with dangerous
enemies. They marked the first stage in the conquest of brain over mere
brawn. The primitive weapons were used not only in fighting other men,
but in fighting off dangerous animals, and then in hunting animals for
food. No doubt the first implement ever used was a club, which gave
a real advantage over the unarmed, scratching, tearing, and biting
enemy. This was a lever which increased the reach of the fighter, and
also increased the power of his blow. The heavier the club, the more
dangerous the weapon, particularly when most of the weight was centered
at the outer end of the stick. But he was a real genius who first
fastened a rock to the end of his club.


THE ART OF BREAKING STONES

Then arose the art of breaking stones--breaking them skillfully, so as
to form a jagged cutting edge. When man began to fashion tools of stone
he left imperishable records of his craftsmanship which enable us to
trace his progress in invention. The first finished tool we find was
the fist hatchet--a stone roughly chipped to form a cutting edge and of
convenient shape for the grasp of the hand. This primitive tool very
slowly, through a period covering thousands of years, developed into
all manner of cutting implements, some with handles of wood and bone.
The ax head was followed by the spearhead and this finally by the
arrowhead, showing that man had at last found a mechanical substitute
for his muscles to hurl projectiles farther and with greater accuracy
than he could throw them by hand.

We marvel at the resourcefulness and skill of the primitive savage in
working so difficult a material as stone. It would baffle a modern
mechanic to be required to shape a piece of flint into an arrowhead
with no other tool than a piece of bone. He is so accustomed to using
tools which are harder than the material they are intended to shape
that he cannot conceive of making any impression upon a piece of flint
with a piece of bone, to say nothing of a stick of hard wood, and yet
such tools were used away back in the Stone Age. At first stones were
roughly shaped by hammering them together. Then the artisans became
more skilled. They discovered that certain stones could be chipped
more regularly and evenly, and the art of flaking off chips of flint
sprang up. Some specimens that belonged to ages long preceding that of
recorded history are beautifully done. The spearheads are symmetrically
shaped like a long narrow leaf, and the stone is evenly furrowed on
both sides with a keen edge all around.

Not only did primitive artisans shape the stone implements with hammer
blows, but they learned how to shape stone by pressure as well, using
a tool that was relatively soft. It is not a very difficult matter to
shape even so hard a substance as glass merely by pressure. If a piece
of glass is laid on a table with its edge slightly overhanging that of
the table, it is possible to chip off the overhanging edge by pressing
a nail or even a hard stick of wood against this edge. A small flake
of glass is thus removed, and, by continuing the process, arrowheads
of any shape may be formed. The tool is placed not against the upper
surface of the glass, but against the edge of the glass, so that only
the lower surface of it is split or flaked off. Then the glass is
turned over and a chip is taken off the opposite face.

In the Middle Stone Age we find the primitive craftsman equipped with
a very complete assortment of stone tools. He had hammers, chisels,
scrapers, drills, and polishing tools. He knew how to make useful
household implements, such as spoons and ladles, out of bone. He
polished his work and ornamented the implements with carvings of
animals. Ivory pins and needles show that he had begun to make himself
clothing from the skins of animals and that he sewed them together with
thongs or tendons.

In the Late Stone Age he had learned how to make vessels of fire-baked
clay. His axes were ground to a sharp edge, and he bored holes in the
ax head to receive the ax handle. The Swiss lake dwellers built houses
of wood and fitted them with all sorts of wooden furniture carved
with stone tools. Among the remains of these interesting settlements
may be found balls of clay which, from the fact that one of them was
discovered with a spool of flax still attached to it, were evidently
used as spinning “whorls” used for spinning flax into thread. Clothing
of skins was giving way to or being supplemented with clothing of woven
fabric.


DISCOVERY OF THE LEVER AND THE WEDGE

Prior to the Stone Age the club was undoubtedly used, in time of
peace--if there ever was a time of peace in those days--to batter down
trees, to beat through entanglements and to dislodge great stones.
Here the first idea of leverage was evidently employed. The club with
a rock tied to it, particularly if the rock was shaped with a sharp
edge, made a better implement for hewing trees. It is quite probable
that soon after this stage of development had been reached, some one
discovered the use of the wedge, particularly in splitting timber. Of
course, no one realized in those early days why it was that he could
pry up a greater weight with a lever than he could lift directly by
hand, or why he could split open a log by driving wedges into it. The
_art_ of mechanics was in existence long ages before _science_ of
mechanics began to be studied. But it was not until men began to look
into the why of things that rapid progress was made.

We can go on endlessly with our speculations on the evolution of tools
and machinery up to the time when historians began to record the
mechanical achievements of man. Unfortunately even after historians
began to write they were so filled with admiration for the destructive
work of man that they had no time to record his constructive work.
The warrior who spread havoc and terror received all the glory, and
his deeds were written on parchment, inscribed in clay and carved in
stone; but the humble artisan was not worthy of mention. Even when the
science of mechanics came to be studied, it was shrouded in a veil of
mystery, and it was beneath the dignity of the man of science to impart
his knowledge to the artisan. There was a lack of cooperation between
science and industry that has persisted to a certain extent even up
to the present time. Some of the most ingenious inventions of the
ancients were employed by a corrupt and crafty priesthood to produce
apparently miraculous effects and hoodwink the general public; and so,
in looking back to the early days of mechanics, we are obliged to draw
upon our imagination to trace its evolution, supplementing this by a
study of the tools of primitive people of more recent time. Practically
every form of hand tool we now use must have been known to the ancient
artisan.


INVENTION OF THE WHEEL

We are not going to attempt to write a history of the evolution of
machinery, but there is one invention whose origin is lost in the
remote prehistoric ages which deserves more than passing attention. It
is a pity that we have no clue as to who invented the wheel or how this
most important element that enters into the construction of nearly all
machinery was evolved. The invention called for a remarkable degree of
originality. There is nothing like a wheel in nature. Levers we have
in our own physical frame. But a wheel is something that is distinctly
a human creation. Whoever invented it must have been a real genius, a
James Watt or a Thomas Edison of his day. Certainly we owe more to the
invention of the wheel than we do even to so revolutionary a machine
as the steam engine, or the flying machine. How it was ever first
conceived is a mystery. Maybe this primeval genius got his idea from
seeing a stone rolling downhill, or he may have seen a tumbling weed
rolling along the ground before the wind. It may be that the forerunner
of the wheel was a roller shaped out of a log, for certainly primitive
civilization must have advanced enough to have known how to hew timber
before it would have been capable of fashioning a wheel. Some observant
man might have noticed that he could drag a heavy timber over a
rolling log much more easily than he could along the bare ground, and
gradually the roller evolved into a wheel.

We can speculate upon the evolution of vehicles and transportation,
once the wheel was invented. Of course, the first method of
transporting loads was to carry them in the arms. Possibly loads were
placed on skids and dragged along by one end. Away back in early times,
it was discovered that two persons could carry more than twice as much
as one, if the load were placed on a couple of poles. There was no
friction to contend with, and not only was the load cut in two, because
each man bore half of it, but the position of the load was such that
it could be borne more easily. After the wheel was discovered, some
one must have conceived of the idea of dispensing with an assistant by
placing a wheel between the poles of the stretcher, thus making a crude
wheelbarrow. It is more likely that two wheels were first used, making
a cart of the stretcher, because the crude workmen of those days could
hardly have produced anything but a very wobbly wheelbarrow. At any
rate, the wheel, or pair of wheels, robbed one man of his job. Only one
bearer was required where before two had been used. Labor costs were
immediately reduced 50 per cent.


DISPLACING MEN WITH MACHINES

In the very earliest days of invention machines began to displace men.
Had there been unions in those days, no doubt there would have been
strenuous opposition to the introduction of this substitute for an
honest worker. But among the ancients, even more than at the present
time, invention meant greater production rather than less work,
because the laborer of that time was not a hired man but a slave.
There was no object in cutting down labor when it cost practically
nothing. The only stimulus to invention was greater production.

The invention of the wheel meant the dawn of transportation, which
is the backbone of civilization, and from it resulted no end of
other inventions. It made it possible for communities to come into
closer touch with each other. It meant circulation--an interchange of
knowledge and of products. Food was transported from one locality to
another, enabling certain communities to dispense with agricultural
work and specialize in certain lines of manufacture; for they could
barter their products for food raised by other communities. There are
some tribes to-day which are most backward because they are separated
from other tribes by rivers, while other tribes similarly placed owe
their progress to the fact that they have developed sufficient skill to
build crude bridges and thus gain access to the outside world.


RAISING WATER

In Egypt the wheel had a wonderful effect on agriculture. In that dry
land water is, and always has been, most precious. No wonder the Nile
was venerated! It meant life--life to crops, and hence life to man.
How to raise water from this stream of life in time of drought was
the great problem of the Egyptian. As slave labor was cheap, it was
customary to haul up the precious water, a bucket at a time, and pour
it over the fields. Then some one discovered that this process could be
simplified by using a _shadoof_ or swape; in other words, a long pole
fulcrumed near one end, with a heavy rock for a counterbalance lashed
to the shorter arm, and a bucket tied by a long rope to the longer
arm of the lever. This primitive machine is still to be found in some
rural districts. With this contrivance, a heavier load could be lifted
than by hand, because, when raising the bucket, the weight of the rock
would assist in lifting the water. After the swape came all manner of
ingenious devices for lifting the water. There were seesaw arrangements
which would scoop up some of the water at each oscillation of the
seesaw, and in one ingenious contrivance there was a succession of
seesaws by which the water was raised to a considerable height, whence
it poured down into ditches that irrigated the fields.

Then some one invented a water wheel or a great wheel, fitted with
buckets, which was turned by human or ox power, and which poured a
steady stream of water into the irrigating ditches.

But the greatest invention was that of the engineer who actually made
the river turn the wheel. It was probably on the Nile that the _noria_,
as this machine was called, was first put into service.

The wheel was provided with paddles, so that the current made it
revolve, and the water spilled out of the buckets into a trough as
they were turned over by the wheel. We can imagine the triumph of the
ancient inventor who developed that machine. True, the river might
arise in its wrath now and then and wreck the machine, but in wrecking
the wheel it had to flood the land, which, after all, was exactly what
was aimed at. The anger of the river was short-lived; it soon quieted
down and went on placidly turning the wheel which robbed it of the
precious water. It was a great event in the history of engineering. The
Nile had been harnessed. One of the great powers of nature had been set
to work.




CHAPTER II

THE ANATOMY OF A MACHINE


EVERY animal is a complex machine, provided with its own motive power
and a brain for directing the operation of its own mechanical elements.
Not satisfied with the mechanism that nature has put into the human
machine, man has reached for other elements and devised mechanisms
of his own in order to supplement the human machine and increase its
efficiency. At first, as we have seen, these elements were hand tools
of the crudest sort; but they were gradually improved and then they
were combined into what we term machines. In developing these machines,
he naturally took his own system as a pattern and was guided to a
large extent by an examination of his own physical structure. We see
this very clearly in the names of the different parts of machinery,
which are taken from the names of similar parts in the human frame.
Almost every member of the body is used in mechanical terminology. For
instance, we have the “head” and the “foot,” the “arms” and the “legs,”
the “fingers” and the “ankles,” “elbows,” “shoulders,” “trunk,” “hips,”
and various parts of the face, such as the “eyes,” “ears,” “nose,”
“mouth,” “teeth,” “lips,” and even the “gums,” to indicate parts of
machinery which have some remote resemblance to these features.

Before we can understand machinery we must have some general knowledge
of the elements of which it is composed. Probably most of the readers
of this book already possess a fair knowledge of machine elements and
mechanical movements and they can well afford to skip this chapter.
However, for the benefit of the uninitiated, we must put a machine on
the operating table, dissect it, and explain its anatomical structure.
We cannot attempt a very detailed study, but will confine ourselves to
the most important elements.

Every machine is made up of movable parts and fixed parts, the latter
serving to guide or constrain the motion of the former; for no
combination of elements will constitute a machine unless the parts are
_constrained_ to move in certain predetermined directions.


THE LEVER

Among the moving elements the first to be considered is the lever,
which really forms a broad classification comprising many elements that
will hardly be recognized as levers at first blush. Levers in some form
are to be found in practically every machine. A wheel, a gear, and a
pulley are really levers in disguise, as will be explained presently.

Of course everyone knows that a simple lever consists of a rigid bar
that swings on a fulcrum. The fulcrum may be a knife edge, a shaft
passing through the bar or any element on which the bar can be swung
or oscillated. The purpose of the lever is to give a certain advantage
in the application of a force to a load. This may be a change of speed
and distance of travel, and hence of power, or merely a change of
direction.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--THREE ORDERS OF SIMPLE LEVERS]

There are three types or _orders_ of levers produced by varying the
relative positions of the points where the fulcrum, the force or
effort, and the weight or load are applied. These are shown in Figure
1. In the lever of the _first order_ the fulcrum is placed between the
effort and the weight; in the lever of the _second order_ the weight
is applied between the fulcrum and the effort; and in the lever of the
_third order_ the effort is applied between the fulcrum and the weight.
In each case that part of the lever which extends from the fulcrum to
the point where the effort is applied is called the _effort arm_, and
that which extends from the fulcrum to the point where the weight is
supported is the _weight arm_. The weight that can be lifted with a
given effort depends upon the ratio of the effort arm to the weight
arm. If the two arms are of equal length, the effort is equal to the
weight, but twice the weight can be lifted with the same effort if the
effort arm is twice as long as the weight arm. You can lift a ton with
an effort of only 100 pounds if your effort arm is twenty times as long
as your weight arm but the end of your effort arm would have to move
twenty inches to raise the ton weight one inch. We are assuming in all
these cases that the lever itself has no weight and that there is no
friction at the fulcrum.

Of course levers are not used merely for the purpose of lifting weight,
but to overcome any resistance or merely to apply pressure upon an
object. In almost every household we may find examples of the three
orders of levers. A pair of shears, for instance, is composed of two
levers of the first order, swinging on a common fulcrum. The effort is
applied at the handles, and the weight or load is the material that is
cut by the blades or, speaking more technically, the handles are the
_effort arms_ and the blades are the _weight arms_. A material that
is too tough to be cut at the tip ends of the blades may be easily
cut if we move it in near the fulcrum or pin that hinges the blades
together; for by doing this we shorten the weight arms, because the
weight arm is measured not to the end of the blade, but to the point
where it is cutting into the material. To cut very tough material, such
as heavy tin or sheet steel, we use long-handled short-bladed shears.
The cutting pressure depends upon the ratio of the effort arm to the
weight arm. If the effort arms are twice as long as the weight arms,
the cutting pressure is twice as great as that applied at the handles.

A nutcracker consists of a pair of levers of the second order. The
fulcrum is at one end and the effort or pressure is applied at the
opposite end of the levers or handles, while the equivalent of the
weight (in this case the nut) is placed between the effort and the
fulcrum. Again the _effort arm_ is measured from the fulcrum or hinge
pin of the tool to the point where the hand pressure is applied, and
the weight arm is measured from the fulcrum to the nut. The effort
arm may be four or five times as long as the weight arm, so that the
pressure exerted on the nut is four or five times as great as that
exerted by the hand on the ends of the handles.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--AN ANGULAR OR BELL-CRANK LEVER]

In the case of a pair of sugar tongs we have another tool something
like the nutcracker in construction, but here the weight, i.e., the
lump of sugar, is seized by the ends of the tongs while the hand
pressure is applied somewhere between the fulcrum and the weight. Hence
we have here a lever or pair of levers of the third order. The _effort
arm_ of a pair of tongs is always shorter than the _weight arm_ and
the pressure on the sugar lump is always less than that exerted on the
tongs by the hand. Evidently the most powerful tool of the three is the
nutcracker, because the effort arms extend over the full length of the
tool and are always longer than the weight arms.

A lever need not consist of a straight bar; the effort arm may form
an angle with the weight arm, forming what is known as an angular or
bell-crank lever (Figure 2). When a common claw hammer is used to pull
out a nail, the claws that slip under the head of the nail form the
weight arm and the hammer handle the effort arm. A horizontal pull on
the handle produces a vertical lift on the nail.

Sometimes two or more levers are interconnected, as in Figure 3, the
effort arm of one being linked to the weight arm of the other. This
serves to increase the lifting force at the weight and at the same time
keep the mechanism within compact limits. Such compounding can go on
indefinitely and is subject to all sorts of variations.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--COMPOUND LEVERAGE]

One thing we must not forget, and it is a matter that is commonly
overlooked by perpetual motion cranks, namely, that while a pound of
pressure on the effort arm may be made to lift two, four, or a hundred
times as many pounds on the weight arm by varying the relative length
of these arms, it has to move two, four, or a hundred times as far as
the weight arm, so that the work done on one side of the fulcrum is
always exactly equal to that done on the other side.


CONTINUOUS REVOLVING LEVERAGE

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--PRIMITIVE GEAR WHEELS--TWO COACTING GROUPS OF
LEVERS]

If we take a number of levers radiating from a common fulcrum like the
spokes of a carriage wheel, we have a primitive gear wheel. Two such
groups of levers may be mounted on parallel shafts so that when one
is turned its spokes will successively engage the spokes of the other
group and make the latter turn (see Figure 4). Each spoke is first
an effort arm on one side of the wheel and then a weight arm as it
turns around to the other side of the wheel, and as the effort arms
and weight arms are of the same length there is no multiplication of
power. A pound on one side of the wheel cannot lift more than a pound
on the other. The driven wheel receives the same power as the driving
wheel except for such loss as may be due to friction at the bearings or
where the spokes contact. The only advantage of such a pair of gears
is that the direction of rotation of the driven wheel is the reverse
of that of the driving wheel. If the spokes of one wheel are longer
than those of the other, we have at once a variation in the rate of
rotation proportional to the relative diameters of the two wheels. In
Figure 5, for instance, the diameter of the driving wheel A is twice
the diameter of the driven gear B, and so, for each revolution of A, B
must make two revolutions, i.e., the driver must make two revolutions
for each revolution of the driven wheel. In other words, the speed of
revolution is doubled. However, if we make B the driver the speed of
the driven wheel A will be half of that of wheel B.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--COACTING LEVERS OF UNEQUAL LENGTH]

In primitive machines spoke gears were seldom mounted on parallel
shafts because of the difficulty of keeping the spokes in alignment.
Instead, one shaft was mounted at right angles to the other so that
one set of spokes would cross the other (Figure 6), thus producing
the equivalent of a bevel gear. This was of advantage in changing the
plane of rotation. A later development was the _barrel_ or _lantern
gear_, which permitted transfer of power without changing the plane of
rotation. A cylindrical bundle of rods constituted one of the wheels
(as shown in Figure 7). Instead of being crudely formed of spokes, the
other wheel sometimes consisted of a disk with pins radiating from
its rim. Such gears in far more refined form are still used in modern
clocks and watches. A still further development for transmitting motion
to a plane at right angles to that of the driving shaft is shown in
Figure 8. Here we have a _crown_ gear in which the pins instead of
radiating from the periphery of the disk project from the side face of
the gear.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--PRIMITIVE EQUIVALENT OF THE BEVEL GEAR]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--PRIMITIVE LANTERN GEAR]

Turning back to our first spoked wheels, it is very evident that we
may put a rim over the spokes or even fill in between the spokes and
convert the wheels into solid disks that are in frictional engagement
with each other without getting away from the fact that we are dealing
with levers. Each wheel, then, consists of a continuous revolving
lever. Friction gears are used quite commonly in machinery when it is
desirable to have the wheels slip if subjected to excessive strain.


TOOTHED GEARS

By forming teeth on one gear to mesh between similar teeth on the
other, we convert the friction gears into a pair of spur gears (Figure
9). We need not go into the intricacies of the form of gear teeth.
They are designed to be in continuous rolling contact while they are
in mesh. The novice is apt to call all spur gears “cogwheels” and
gear-teeth “cogs.” Mechanics, however, recognize a difference between
cog wheels and spur wheels. In the former, the teeth, or cogs, are not
cast upon or cut out of the wheel body, but are separate pieces fitted
to the wheel. Such wheels are found in old water mills. They consist of
wooden wheels with iron or steel teeth mortised in the wooden rim of
the wheel. In general it is safer to speak of spur gears because there
are few cogwheels now in use.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--CROWN AND LANTERN GEAR]

When a small gear engages a large one, the former is commonly known as
a _pinion_.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--SPUR AND PINION GEAR]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--BEVEL FRICTION GEARS]

If two friction wheels are to turn at right angles one to the other,
they must have conical bearing surfaces, as in Figure 10. The angle
between the shafts of the two gears and the relative size of the gears
may be changed as desired, provided each cone surface has its apex at
the intersection of the two shafts or axes. It is easy to understand
how such conical friction gears may be converted into toothed bevel
gears (Figure 11), by forming teeth on the conical surfaces, and it
will be evident that the teeth must taper toward the apex of the two
cones. Two bevel gears of equal diameter, and with shafts set at right
angles one to the other, are known as _miter_ gears.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--TOOTHED BEVEL GEARS]

So far we have not shown any combination of gearing that will multiply
power. In Figure 5, the driver A is twice the diameter of the driven
wheel B, and the latter makes two revolutions for one of A, but the
speed at the periphery of the two wheels is the same. A pull of one
pound at the point _a_ produces a pressure of one pound at _b_, and
this in turn produces a lift of one pound at _c_ because the levers
in each wheel are perfectly balanced, that is, each lever has equal
effort and weight arms. The way to obtain an increase of power and of
peripheral speed is to fasten two wheels of unequal diameters together
on the same center and apply the effort to one of the wheels (as in
Figure 12) and the weight to the other wheel. This gives us what is
technically known as a _wheel and axle_. The dotted lines show that
we have here a lever of the first order which can be used to multiply
power in the same way that a bar lever does. If one wheel is twice the
diameter of the other then a pound of effort will lift two pounds of
weight.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--WHEEL AND AXLE OR REVOLVING LEVER OF FIRST
ORDER]

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--REVOLVING LEVERS OF THE 2D AND 3D ORDER]

Figure 13 shows how the effort and weight can be shifted about in such
fashion as to give us a lever of the second and one of the third order.
The power may be enormously increased and the speed of the final wheel
greatly reduced by setting up a train of gears in which the effort
is received by the larger one of each couple and is delivered by the
smaller one. In Figure 14 the smaller wheels are half the diameter of
the larger ones. A pound of pressure at A will amount to 2 at B, 4 at
C, 8 at D, 16 at E, and 32 at F. On the other hand, point A will have
to move through 32 inches to make the point F move an inch.

[Illustration: RAISING WATER WITH A CHAIN OF POTS

A primitive pump still used in Egypt]

[Illustration: A HORSE-OPERATED CHAIN-PUMP USED IN GREECE]

[Illustration: MULTIPLE SPINDLE DRILL IN MOTOR CAR FACTORY]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--A TRAIN OF SPUR GEARS]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--PULLEYS OF THE 1ST, 2D, AND 3D ORDERS]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF BLOCK AND TACKLE]

A pulley is merely a modification of the wheel. Figure 15 shows how it
may be arranged to correspond to the three orders of simple levers.
If the pulley axis is fixed, as in the first order, the effort and
weight arms are equal and hence balanced. In the second order the
wheel is bodily movable, hence one pound will raise two pounds of
weight because the power arm is twice as long as the weight arm, while
in the third order it takes two pounds of lift to raise one pound of
weight. There is no end of possible combinations of pulleys which will
multiply power in the same way that bar levers do when compounded. A
common arrangement of block and tackle is given in Figure 16. There is
a four-sheave pulley block above and a three-sheave block below, but
in order to trace the rope clearly the pulley wheels or sheaves are
represented as of different diameters. The arrangement consists of a
series of levers of the first order in the upper pulley block coupled
to a series of levers of the second order in the lower block. To find
the weight that a given power will lift, multiply the effort by the
number of strands of rope that are supporting the weight. In this case
there are seven such strands, not counting the strand E, to which the
effort or pull is applied. This means that a pull of a hundred pounds
at E will lift 700 pounds at W. Of course a pull of seven feet at E
will raise the weight only one foot.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--INCLINED PLANE WITH EFFORT PARALLEL TO THE
INCLINED FACE]


THE INCLINED PLANE AND ITS FAMILY

The inclined plane constitutes a second broad classification of machine
elements. The wedge, the screw, the cam, and the eccentric, all belong
to the family of the inclined plane.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--INCLINED PLANE WITH EFFORT PARALLEL TO THE
BASE]

A simple form of inclined plane is pictured in Figure 17, which shows
a weight W being rolled up an incline. The effort required to carry it
to the top of the incline depends, of course, upon the steepness of the
incline. The drawing shows a rise of 3 feet on a slope 5 feet long, and
the weight of the wheel is, say 20 pounds. To find the effort required,
the weight is multiplied by the rise (20 × 3 = 60) and divided by
the length of the slope (60/5 = 12) and we find that it takes only
12 pounds to roll the 20-pound wheel to the top of the incline. This
holds true when the pull is parallel to the inclined face. If the
pull is parallel to the base of the incline, as in Figure 18, we must
divide by the length of the base instead of the length of the incline
(60/4 = 15) and we find that it takes 15 pounds of effort to pull the
weight up the incline. If the pull is exerted at an angle both to the
base and the inclined face, we have a problem that is slightly more
complicated and we need not go into it here because it involves a bit
of trigonometry. In all cases, however, it may be noted that the amount
of rope that is taken in, in hauling the weight up the incline, bears a
definite relation to the amount of effort required to raise the weight.
In Figure 17, 5 feet of rope must be pulled in, in order to raise the
weight 3 feet, so that ⅗ of 20 or 12 pounds is all that is required
to pull up the weight, while in Figure 18, 4 feet of rope is hauled
in for a lift of 3 feet, so that ¾ of 20 or 15 pounds is required to
pull up the weight. In this respect the inclined plane is exactly like
the lever or the pulley, for the _effort_ multiplied by the _distance_
through which it is exerted is always exactly equal to the _weight_
multiplied by the _distance_ through which it moves. Thus in Figure
17, the effort 12 pounds multiplied by the distance 5 = the weight 20
pounds times the distance 3, and in Figure 18, effort 15 x distance 4
= weight 20 x distance 3. Of course, we are ignoring the weight of the
rope and the friction which, in actual practice, are important factors
to be reckoned with.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--ENDLESS SCREW OR WORM GEAR]

So far we have considered a fixed inclined plane, but when the inclined
plane is moved between the weight and a fixed base it is known as a
wedge, and in this case, too, the effort required to move the wedge
multiplied by the distance the wedge moves is equal to the weight
multiplied by the distance it is lifted.

The commonest form of inclined plane is the screw which is merely an
inclined plane bent around a cylinder. A screw engaging a toothed
wheel, as in Figure 19, gives a combination known as an “endless
screw,” or, more commonly, as a worm gear. The screw or worm is always
the driver, and as it must make a complete turn to move the gear
through a space of one tooth, the power of this combination is very
great. It is practically impossible to turn the worm by using the gear
wheel as a driver because the friction developed at the point where
the worm and gear contact is very great. For this reason worm gearing
is used in the steering gear of automobiles. The shaft of the steering
wheel is fitted with a worm which meshes with a worm gear on the parts
connected with the wheels. It is very easy to turn the wheels by
operating the steering wheel, but if the wheels strike a rut or a stone
they are not deflected from their course, because the worm makes it
impossible for them to turn the steering wheel.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--HELICAL OR SPIRAL GEARS]

The spiral gear shown in Figure 20 is a cross between a worm gear and
spur gear. The teeth are spirals set at an angle of 45 degrees to the
axis of the wheel. In this case either gear can be used to drive the
other, and the advantage of such a pair is that power is transmitted
from one shaft to another in a different plane and at right angles to
the first.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--DRUM CAM]

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--PROFILE OR DISK CAM]

Cams are usually irregular revolving inclined planes. Figure 21, shows
a cylinder or drum cam. A groove is cut in the cylindrical wall of the
cam and an arm or lever is provided with a roller which rolls in the
groove. When the cam is revolved the lever is constrained to follow all
the twists and turns of the groove. A different form of cam is shown in
Figure 22. It is formed with an irregular periphery against which the
roller is pressed by a spring. As the cam wheel revolves, the roller
and the arm to which it is attached must move in and out over all the
hills and valleys of the periphery. The cam is one of the most useful
elements in modern machinery, for it provides a very simple means of
producing the most complicated and irregular motions.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--ECCENTRIC BY WHICH ROTARY MOTION IS CONVERTED
INTO RECTILINEAR MOTION]

We cannot attempt to describe all the different types of cams, but
reference should be made to the eccentric, which is a form of cam
commonly used to operate the valves of a steam engine. The cam in this
case is a perfectly circular disk, but the shaft that turns it does not
lie at the center of the disk, consequently an object bearing against
the periphery must move toward and away from the center as the disk
revolves. Instead of using a spring-pressed roller to bear against one
side of the disk, the whole disk is encircled with a ring of steel
known as an eccentric strap. This strap is bolted to a valve rod and
as the eccentric revolves the strap makes the valve rod move back and
forth. (See Figure 23.)

A description of all the various combinations of gearing, link motions,
ratchets, escapements, clutches, and miscellaneous movements would
easily fill the rest of this book, and we must therefore content
ourselves with this very brief survey of a few of the more important
elements employed in the construction of modern machinery.




CHAPTER III

MACHINES FOR MAKING MACHINES


WHILE we may glory in the wonderful mechanical progress of to-day, we
must not overlook the marvelous skill of the ancient artisan nor forget
that it is to his inventive genius that we are indebted for practically
every hand tool we possess. Only a few special tools owe their origin
to the modern inventor. All the rest date back beyond the twilight of
history. We have merely improved upon these tools by slight changes of
design or the employment of better materials in their construction.

As users of these tools we cannot begin to compare with t