# The Principles of Psychology
Author: William James
Category: 05_psicologia
Source: Gutenberg #57628
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:20:21.402291
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

THE PRINCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGY

BY

WILLIAM JAMES

PROFESSOR OF PSYCHOLOGY IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY


IN TWO VOLUMES

VOL. I


NEW YORK
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

1918




                                  TO
                            MY DEAR FRIEND
                           FRANÇOIS PILLON.
                       AS A TOKEN OF AFFECTION,
                  AND AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF WHAT I OWE
                                TO THE
                        CRITIQUE PHILOSOPHIQUE.




PREFACE.


The treatise which follows has in the main grown up in connection with
the author's class-room instruction in Psychology, although it is true
that some of the chapters are more 'metaphysical,' and others fuller of
detail, than is suitable for students who are going over the subject
for the first time. The consequence of this is that, in spite of the
exclusion of the important subjects of pleasure and pain, and moral and
æsthetic feelings and judgments, the work has grown to a length which
no one can regret more than the writer himself. The man must indeed be
sanguine who, in this crowded age, can hope to have many readers for
fourteen hundred continuous pages from his pen. But _wer Vieles bringt
wird Manchem etwas bringen_; and, by judiciously skipping according to
their several needs, I am sure that many sorts of readers, even those
who are just beginning the study of the subject, will find my book of
use. Since the beginners are most in need of guidance, I suggest for
their behoof that they omit altogether on a first reading chapters 6,
7, 8, 10 (from page 330 to page 371), 12, 13, 15, 17, 20, 21, and 28.
The better to awaken the neophyte's interest, it is possible that the
wise order would be to pass directly from chapter 4 to chapters 23, 24,
25, and 26, and thence to return to the first volume again. Chapter
20, on Space-perception, is a terrible thing, which, unless written
with all that detail, could not be fairly treated at all. An abridgment
of it, called 'The Spatial Quale,' which appeared in the Journal of
Speculative Philosophy, vol. xiii, p. 64, may be found by some persons
a useful substitute for the entire chapter.

I have kept close to the point of view of natural science throughout
the book. Every natural science assumes certain data uncritically, and
declines to challenge the elements between which its own 'laws' obtain,
and from which its own deductions are carried on. Psychology, the
science of finite individual minds, assumes as its data (1) _thoughts
and feelings_, and (2) _a physical world_ in time and space with which
they coexist and which (3) _they know_. Of course these data themselves
are discussable; but the discussion of them (as of other elements) is
called metaphysics and falls outside the province of this book. This
book, assuming that thoughts and feelings exist and are vehicles of
knowledge, thereupon contends that psychology when she has ascertained
the empirical correlation of the various sorts of thought or feeling
with definite conditions of the brain, can go no farther--can go
no farther, that is, as a natural science. If she goes farther she
becomes metaphysical. All attempts to _explain_ our phenomenally given
thoughts as products of deeper-lying entities (whether the latter be
named 'Soul,' 'Transcendental Ego,' 'Ideas,' or 'Elementary Units
of Consciousness') are metaphysical. This book consequently rejects
both the associationist and the spiritualist theories; and in this
strictly positivistic point of view consists the only feature of it
for which I feel tempted to claim originality. Of course this point of
view is anything but ultimate. Men must keep thinking; and the data
assumed by psychology, just like those assumed by physics and the other
natural sciences, must some time be overhauled. The effort to overhaul
them clearly and thoroughly is metaphysics; but metaphysics can only
perform her task well when distinctly conscious of its great extent.
Metaphysics fragmentary, irresponsible, and half-awake, and unconscious
that she is metaphysical, spoils two good things when she injects
herself into a natural science. And it seems to me that the theories
both of a spiritual agent and of associated 'ideas' are, as they figure
in the psychology-books, just such metaphysics as this. Even if their
results be true, it would be as well to keep them, _as thus presented_,
out of psychology as it is to keep the results of idealism out of
physics.

I have therefore treated our passing thoughts as integers, and
regarded the mere laws of their coexistence with brain-states as the
ultimate laws for our science. The reader will in vain seek for any
closed system in the book. It is mainly a mass of descriptive details,
running out into queries which only a metaphysics alive to the weight
of her task can hope successfully to deal with. That will perhaps be
centuries hence; and meanwhile the best mark of health that a science
can show is this unfinished-seeming front.

The completion of the book has been so slow that several chapters
have been published successively in Mind, the Journal of Speculative
Philosophy, the Popular Science Monthly, and Scribner's Magazine.
Acknowledgment is made in the proper places.

The bibliography, I regret to say, is quite unsystematic. I have
habitually given my authority for special experimental facts; but
beyond that I have aimed mainly to cite books that would probably
be actually used by the ordinary American college-student in his
collateral reading. The bibliography in W. Volkmann von Volkmar's
Lehrbuch der Psychologie (1875) is so complete, up to its date,
that there is no need of an inferior duplicate. And for more recent
references, Sully's Outlines, Dewey's Psychology, and Baldwin's
Handbook of Psychology may be advantageously used.

Finally, where one owes to so many, it seems absurd to single out
particular creditors; yet I cannot resist the temptation at the end of
my first literary venture to record my gratitude for the inspiration I
have got from the writings of J. S. Mill, Lotze, Renouvier, Hodgson,
and Wundt, and from the intellectual companionship (to name only five
names) of Chauncey Wright and Charles Peirce in old times, and more
recently of Stanley Hall, James Putnam, and Josiah Royce.

HARVARD UNIVERSITY, August 1890.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

THE SCOPE OF PSYCHOLOGY,

Mental Manifestations depend on Cerebral Conditions, 1. Pursuit of ends
and choice are the marks of Mind's presence.


CHAPTER II.

THE FUNCTIONS OF THE BRAIN

Reflex, semi-reflex, and voluntary acts. The Frog's nerve-centres.
General notion of the hemispheres. Their Education--the Meynert
scheme. The phrenological contrasted with the physiological
conception. The localization of function in the hemispheres.
The motor zone. Motor Aphasia. The sight-centre. Mental
blindness. The hearing-centre. Sensory Aphasia. Centres
for smell and taste. The touch-centre. Man's Consciousness
limited to the hemispheres. The restitution of function. Final
correction of the Meynert scheme. Conclusions.


CHAPTER III.

ON SOME GENERAL CONDITIONS OF BRAIN-ACTIVITY

The summation of Stimuli. Reaction-time. Cerebral blood-supply,
97. Cerebral Thermometry. Phosphorus and Thought.


CHAPTER IV.

HABIT

Due to plasticity of neural matter. Produces ease of action.
Diminishes attention, 115. Concatenated performances. Ethical
implications and pedagogic maxims.


CHAPTER V.

THE AUTOMATON-THEORY

The theory described. Reasons for it. Reasons against it.


CHAPTER VI.

THE MIND-STUFF THEORY

Evolutionary Psychology demands a Mind-dust. Some alleged proofs
that it exists. Refutation of these proofs. Self-compounding
of mental facts is inadmissible. Can states of mind be
unconscious? Refutation of alleged proofs of unconscious thought.
Difficulty of stating the connection between mind and brain.
'The Soul' is logically the least objectionable hypothesis.
Conclusion.


CHAPTER VII.

THE METHODS AND SNARES OF PSYCHOLOGY

Psychology is a natural Science. Introspection, 185. Experiment.
Sources of error. The 'Psychologist's fallacy'.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE RELATIONS OF MINDS TO OTHER THINGS

Time relations: lapses of Consciousness--Locke _v_. Descartes. The
'unconsciousness' of hysterics not genuine. Minds may split into
dissociated parts. Space-relations: the Seat of the Soul.
Cognitive relations. The Psychologist's point of view. Two
kinds of knowledge, acquaintance and knowledge about.


CHAPTER IX.

THE STREAM OF THOUGHT, 224

Consciousness tends to the personal form. It is in constant
change. It is sensibly continuous. 'Substantive' and
'transitive' parts of Consciousness. Feelings of relation.
Feelings of tendency. The 'fringe' of the object. The feeling
of rational sequence. Thought possible in any kind of mental
material. Thought and language. Consciousness is cognitive.
The word Object. Every cognition is due to one integral pulse
of thought. Diagrams of Thought's stream. Thought is always
selective.


CHAPTER X.

THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF SELF

The Empirical Self or Me. Its constituents. The material
self. The Social Self. The Spiritual Self. Difficulty of
apprehending Thought as a purely spiritual activity. Emotions of
Self. Rivalry and conflict of one's different selves. Their
hierarchy. What Self we love in 'Self-love'. The Pure Ego.
The verifiable ground of the sense of personal identity. The
passing Thought is the only Thinker which Psychology requires.
Theories of Self-consciousness: 1) The theory of the Soul. 2) The
Associationist theory. 3) The Transcendentalist theory. The
mutations of the Self. Insane delusions. Alternating selves.
Mediumships or possessions. Summary.


CHAPTER XI.

ATTENTION

Its neglect by English psychologists. Description of it.
To how many things can we attend at once? Wundt's experiments
on displacement of date of impressions simultaneously attended to.
Personal equation. The varieties of attention. Passive
attention. Voluntary attention. Attention's effects on
sensation;--on discrimination;--on recollection;--on
reaction-time. The neural process in attention: 1) Accommodation
of sense-organ. 2) Preperception. Is voluntary attention a
resultant or a force? The effort to attend can be conceived as a
resultant. Conclusion. Acquired Inattention.


CHAPTER XII.

CONCEPTION

The sense of sameness. Conception defined. Conceptions are
unchangeable. Abstract ideas, 468. Universals. The conception
'of the same' is not the 'same state' of mind.


CHAPTER XIII.

DISCRIMINATION AND COMPARISON

Locke on discrimination. Martineau _ditto_. Simultaneous
sensations originally fuse into one object. The principle of
mediate comparison. Not all differences are differences of
composition. The conditions of discrimination. The sensation
of difference. The transcendentalist theory of the perception
of differences uncalled for. The process of analysis. The
process of abstraction. The improvement of discrimination by
practice. Its two causes. Practical interests limit our
discrimination. Reaction-time after discrimination. The
perception of likeness, 528. The magnitude of differences. The
measurement of discriminative sensibility: Weber's law. Fechner's
interpretation of this as the psycho-physic law. Criticism
thereof.


CHAPTER XIV.

ASSOCIATION

The problem of the connection of our thoughts. It depends on
mechanical conditions. Association is of objects thought of,
not of 'ideas'. The rapidity of association. The 'law of
contiguity'. The elementary law of association. Impartial
redintegration. Ordinary or mixed association. The law of
interest. Association by similarity. Elementary expression of
the difference between the three kinds of association. Association
in voluntary thought. Similarity no elementary law. History
of the doctrine of association.


CHAPTER XV.

THE PERCEPTION OF TIME, 605

The sensible present. Its duration is the primitive
time-perception. Accuracy of our estimate of short durations.
We have no sense for empty time. Variations of our time-estimate.
The feeling of past time is a present feeling. Its cerebral
process.


CHAPTER XVI.

MEMORY

Primary memory. Analysis of the phenomenon of memory.
Retention and reproduction are both caused by paths of association
in the brain. The conditions of goodness in memory. Native
retentiveness is unchangeable. All improvement of memory consists
in better _thinking_. Other conditions of good memory.
Recognition, or the sense of familiarity. Exact measurements of
memory. Forgetting. Pathological cases. Professor Ladd
criticised.


INDEX.




PSYCHOLOGY.


CHAPTER I.

THE SCOPE OF PSYCHOLOGY.


Psychology is the Science of Mental Life, both of its phenomena
and of their conditions. The phenomena are such things as we call
feelings, desires, cognitions, reasonings, decisions, and the like;
and, superficially considered, their variety and complexity is such as
to leave a chaotic impression on the observer. The most natural and
consequently the earliest way of unifying the material was, first,
to classify it as well as might be, and, secondly, to affiliate the
diverse mental modes thus found, upon a simple entity, the personal
Soul, of which they are taken to be so many facultative manifestations.
Now, for instance, the Soul manifests its faculty of Memory, now of
Reasoning, now of Volition, or again its Imagination or its Appetite.
This is the orthodox 'spiritualistic' theory of scholasticism and of
common-sense. Another and a less obvious way of unifying the chaos is
to seek common elements in the divers mental facts rather than a common
agent behind them, and to explain them constructively by the various
forms of arrangement of these elements, as one explains houses by
stones and bricks. The 'associationist' schools of Herbart in Germany,
and of Hume the Mills and Bain in Britain have thus constructed a
_psychology without a soul_ by taking discrete 'ideas,' faint or
vivid, and showing how, by their cohesions, repulsions, and forms
of succession, such things as reminiscences, perceptions, emotions,
volitions, passions, theories, and all the other furnishings of an
individual's mind may be engendered. The very Self or _ego_ of the
individual comes in this way to be viewed no longer as the pre-existing
source of the representations, but rather as their last and most
complicated fruit.

Now, if we strive rigorously to simplify the phenomena in either of
these ways, we soon become aware of inadequacies in our method. Any
particular cognition, for example, or recollection, is accounted for
on the soul-theory by being referred to the spiritual faculties of
Cognition or of Memory. These faculties themselves are thought of as
absolute properties of the soul; that is, to take the case of memory,
no reason is given why we should remember a fact as it happened, except
that so to remember it constitutes the essence of our Recollective
Power. We may, as spiritualists, try to explain our memory's failures
and blunders by secondary causes. But its _successes_ can invoke no
factors save the existence of certain objective things to be remembered
on the one hand, and of our faculty of memory on the other. When,
for instance, I recall my graduation-day, and drag all its incidents
and emotions up from death's dateless night, no mechanical cause can
explain this process, nor can any analysis reduce it to lower terms or
make its nature seem other than an ultimate _datum_, which, whether we
rebel or not at its mysteriousness, must simply be taken for granted if
we are to psychologize at all. However the associationist may represent
the present ideas as thronging and arranging themselves, still, the
spiritualist insists, he has in the end to admit that _something_,
be it brain, be it 'ideas,' be it 'association,' _knows_ past time
_as_ past, and fills it out with this or that event. And when the
spiritualist calls memory an 'irreducible faculty,' he says no more
than this admission of the associationist already grants.

And yet the admission is far from being a satisfactory simplification
of the concrete facts. For why should this absolute god-given Faculty
retain so much better the events of yesterday than those of last
year, and, best of all, those of an hour ago? Why, again, in old
age should its grasp of childhood's events seem firmest? Why should
illness and exhaustion enfeeble it? Why should repeating an experience
strengthen our recollection of it? Why should drugs, fevers, asphyxia,
and excitement resuscitate things long since forgotten? If we content
ourselves with merely affirming that the faculty of memory is so
peculiarly constituted by nature as to exhibit just these oddities,
we seem little the better for having invoked it, for our explanation
becomes as complicated as that of the crude facts with which we
started. Moreover there is something grotesque and irrational in the
supposition that the soul is equipped with elementary powers of such an
ingeniously intricate sort. Why _should_ our memory cling more easily
to the near than the remote? Why should it lose its grasp of proper
sooner than of abstract names? Such peculiarities seem quite fantastic;
and might, for aught we can see _a priori_, be the precise opposites of
what they are. Evidently, then, _the faculty does not exist absolutely,
but works under conditions_; and _the quest of the conditions_ becomes
the psychologist's most interesting task.

However firmly he may hold to the soul and her remembering faculty, he
must acknowledge that she never exerts the latter without a _cue_, and
that something must always precede and _remind_ us of whatever we are
to recollect. "An _idea_," says the associationist, "an idea associated
with the remembered thing; and this explains also why things repeatedly
met with are more easily recollected, for their associates on the
various occasions furnish so many distinct avenues of recall." But this
does not explain the effects of fever, exhaustion, hypnotism, old age,
and the like. And in general, the pure associationist's account of our
mental life is almost as bewildering as that of the pure spiritualist.
This multitude of ideas, existing absolutely, yet clinging together,
and weaving an endless carpet of themselves, like dominoes in ceaseless
change, or the bits of glass in a kaleidoscope,--whence do they get
their fantastic laws of clinging, and why do they cling in just the
shapes they do?

For this the associationist must introduce the order of experience in
the outer world. The dance of the ideas is a copy, somewhat mutilated
and altered, of the order of phenomena. But the slightest reflection
shows that phenomena have absolutely no power to influence our ideas
until they have first impressed our senses and our brain. The bare
existence of a past fact is no ground for our remembering it. Unless
we have seen it, or somehow _undergone_ it, we shall never know of its
having been. The expediences of the body are thus one of the conditions
of the faculty of memory being what it is. And a very small amount
of reflection on facts shows that one part of the body, namely, the
brain, is the part whose experiences are directly concerned. If the
nervous communication be cut off between the brain and other parts,
the experiences of those other parts are non-existent for the mind.
The eye is blind, the ear deaf, the hand insensible and motionless.
And conversely, if the brain be injured, consciousness is abolished or
altered, even although every other organ in the body be ready to play
its normal part. A blow on the head, a sudden subtraction of blood, the
pressure of an apoplectic hemorrhage, may have the first effect; whilst
a very few ounces of alcohol or grains of opium or hasheesh, or a whiff
of chloroform or nitrous oxide gas, are sure to have the second. The
delirium of fever, the altered self of insanity, are all due to foreign
matters circulating through the brain, or to pathological changes in
that organ's substance. The fact that the brain is the one immediate
bodily condition of the mental operations is indeed so universally
admitted nowadays that I need spend no more time in illustrating it,
but will simply postulate it and pass on. The whole remainder of the
book will be more or less of a proof that the postulate was correct.

Bodily experiences, therefore, and more particularly brain-experiences,
must take a place amongst those conditions of the mental life of which
Psychology need take account. _The spiritualist and the associationist
must both be 'cerebralists'_, to the extent at least of admitting that
certain peculiarities in the way of working of their own favorite
principles are explicable only by the fact that the brain laws are a
codeterminant of the result. Our first conclusion, then, is that a
certain amount of brain-physiology must be presupposed or included in
Psychology.[1]

       *       *       *       *       *

In still another way the psychologist is forced to be something of a
nerve-physiologist. Mental phenomena are not only conditioned _a parte
ante_ by bodily processes; but they lead to them _a parte post_. That
they lead to _acts_ is of course the most familiar of truths, but I do
not merely mean acts in the sense of voluntary and deliberate muscular
performances. Mental states occasion also changes in the calibre of
blood-vessels, or alteration in the heart-beats, or processes more
subtle still, in glands and viscera. If these are taken into account,
as well as acts which follow at some _remote period_ because the mental
state was once there, it will be safe to lay down the general law
that _no mental modification ever occurs which is not accompanied or
followed by a bodily change_. The ideas and feelings, _e.g_., which
these present printed characters excite in the reader's mind not only
occasion movements of his eyes and nascent movements of articulation in
him, but will some day make him speak, or take sides in a discussion,
or give advice, or choose a book to read, differently from what would
have been the case had they never impressed his retina. Our psychology
must therefore take account not only of the conditions antecedent to
mental states, but of their resultant consequences as well.

       *       *       *       *       *

But actions originally prompted by conscious intelligence may grow
so automatic by dint of habit as to be apparently unconsciously
performed. Standing, walking, buttoning and unbuttoning, piano-playing,
talking, even saying one's prayers, may be done when the mind is
absorbed in other things. The performances of animal _instinct_ seem
semi-automatic, and the _reflex acts_ of self-preservation certainly
are so. Yet they resemble intelligent acts in bringing about the
_same ends_ at which the animals' consciousness, on other occasions,
deliberately aims. Shall the study of such machine-like yet purposive
acts as these be included in Psychology?

The boundary-line of the mental is certainly vague. It is better not
to be pedantic, but to let the science be as vague as its subject,
and include such phenomena as these if by so doing we can throw any
light on the main business in hand. It will ere long be seen, I trust,
that we can; and that we gain much more by a broad than by a narrow
conception of our subject. At a certain stage in the development
of every science a degree of vagueness is what best consists with
fertility. On the whole, few recent formulas have done more real
service of a rough sort in psychology than the Spencerian one that
the essence of mental life and of bodily life are one, namely, 'the
adjustment of inner to outer relations.' Such a formula is vagueness
incarnate; but because it takes into account the fact that minds
inhabit environments which act on them and on which they in turn
react; because, in short, it takes mind in the midst of all its
concrete relations, it is immensely more fertile than the old-fashioned
'rational psychology,' which treated the soul as a detached existent,
sufficient unto itself, and assumed to consider only its nature and
properties. I shall therefore feel free to make any sallies into
zoology or into pure nerve-physiology which may seem instructive
for our purposes, but otherwise shall leave those sciences to the
physiologists.

       *       *       *       *       *

Can we state more distinctly still the manner in which the mental life
seems to intervene between impressions made from without upon the body,
and reactions of the body upon the outer world again? Let us look at a
few facts.

If some iron filings be sprinkled on a table and a magnet brought near
them, they will fly through the air for a certain distance and stick
to its surface. A savage seeing the phenomenon explains it as the
result of an attraction or love between the magnet and the filings.
But let a card cover the poles of the magnet, and the filings will
press forever against its surface without its ever occurring to them
to pass around its sides and thus come into more direct contact with
the object of their love. Blow bubbles through a tube into the bottom
of a pail of water, they will rise to the surface and mingle with the
air. Their action may again be poetically interpreted as due to a
longing to recombine with the mother-atmosphere above the surface. But
if you invert a jar full of water over the pail, they will rise and
remain lodged beneath its bottom, shut in from the outer air, although
a slight deflection from their course at the outset, or a re-descent
towards the rim of the jar when they found their upward course impeded,
would easily have set them free.

If now we pass from such actions as these to those of living things,
we notice a striking difference. Romeo wants Juliet as the filings
want the magnet; and if no obstacles intervene he moves towards her by
as straight a line as they. But Romeo and Juliet, if a wall be built
between them, do not remain idiotically pressing their faces against
its opposite sides like the magnet and the filings with the card. Romeo
soon finds a circuitous way, by scaling the wall or otherwise, of
touching Juliet's lips directly. With the filings the path is fixed;
whether it reaches the end depends on accidents. With the lover it is
the end which is fixed, the path may be modified indefinitely.

Suppose a living frog in the position in which we placed our bubbles
of air, namely, at the bottom of a jar of water. The want of breath
will soon make him also long to rejoin the mother-atmosphere, and he
will take the shortest path to his end by swimming straight upwards.
But if a jar full of water be inverted over him, he will not, like the
bubbles, perpetually press his nose against its unyielding roof, but
will restlessly explore the neighborhood until by re-descending again
he has discovered a path round its brim to the goal of his desires.
Again the fixed end, the varying means!

Such contrasts between living and inanimate performances end by leading
men to deny that in the physical world final purposes exist at all.
Loves and desires are to-day no longer imputed to particles of iron or
of air. No one supposes now that the end of any activity which they
may display is an ideal purpose presiding over the activity from its
outset and soliciting or drawing it into being by a sort of _vis a
fronte_. The end, on the contrary, is deemed a mere passive result,
pushed into being _a tergo_, having had, so to speak, no voice in its
own production. Alter the pre-existing conditions, and with inorganic
materials you bring forth each time a different apparent end. But
with intelligent agents, altering the conditions changes the activity
displayed, but not the end reached; for here the idea of the yet
unrealized end co-operates with the conditions to determine what the
activities shall be.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The pursuance of future ends and the choice of means for their
attainment are thus the mark and criterion of the presence of
mentality_ in a phenomenon. We all use this test to discriminate
between an intelligent and a mechanical performance. We impute no
mentality to sticks and stones, because they never seem to move for
_the sake of_ anything, but always when pushed, and then indifferently
and with no sign of choice. So we unhesitatingly call them senseless.

Just so we form our decision upon the deepest of all philosophic
problems: Is the Kosmos an expression of intelligence rational in its
inward nature, or a brute external fact pure and simple? If we find
ourselves, in contemplating it, unable to banish the impression that it
is a realm of final purposes, that it exists for the sake of something,
we place intelligence at the heart of it and have a religion. If,
on the contrary, in surveying its irremediable flux, we can think
of the present only as so much mere mechanical sprouting from the
past, occurring with no reference to the future, we are atheists and
materialists.

In the lengthy discussions which psychologists have carried on about
the amount of intelligence displayed by lower mammals, or the amount
of consciousness involved in the functions of the nerve-centres of
reptiles, the same test has always been applied: Is the character of
the actions such that we must believe them to be performed _for the
sake_ of their result? The result in question, as we shall hereafter
abundantly see, is as a rule a useful one,--the animal is, on the
whole, safer under the circumstances for bringing it forth. So far
the action has a teleological character; but such mere outward
teleology as this might still be the blind result of _vis a tergo_.
The growth and movements of plants, the processes of development,
digestion, secretion, etc., in animals, supply innumerable instances
of performances useful to the individual which may nevertheless be,
and by most of us are supposed to be, produced by automatic mechanism.
The physiologist does not confidently assert conscious intelligence
in the frog's spinal cord until he has shown that the useful result
which the nervous machinery brings forth under a given irritation
_remains the same when the machinery is altered_. If, to take the stock
instance, the right knee of a headless frog be irritated with acid, the
right foot will wipe it off. When, however, this foot is amputated,
the animal will often raise the _left_ foot to the spot and wipe the
offending material away.

Pflüger and Lewes reason from such facts in the following way: If the
first reaction were the result of mere machinery, they say; if that
irritated portion of the skin discharged the right leg as a trigger
discharges its own barrel of a shot-gun; then amputating the right
foot would indeed frustrate the wiping, but would not make the _left_
leg move. It would simply result in the right stump moving through
the empty air (which is in fact the phenomenon sometimes observed).
The right trigger makes no effort to discharge the left barrel if the
right one be unloaded; nor does an electrical machine ever get restless
because it can only emit sparks, and not hem pillow-cases like a
sewing-machine.

If, on the contrary, the right leg originally moved for the _purpose_
of wiping the acid, then nothing is more natural than that, when the
easiest means of effecting that purpose prove fruitless, other means
should be tried. Every failure must keep the animal in a state of
disappointment which will lead to all sorts of new trials and devices;
and tranquillity will not ensue till one of these, by a happy stroke,
achieves the wished-for end.

In a similar way Goltz ascribes intelligence to the frog's optic
lobes and cerebellum. We alluded above to the manner in which a sound
frog imprisoned in water will discover an outlet to the atmosphere.
Goltz found that frogs deprived of their cerebral hemispheres would
often exhibit a like ingenuity. Such a frog, after rising from the
bottom and finding his farther upward progress checked by the glass
bell which has been inverted over him, will not persist in butting
his nose against the obstacle until dead of suffocation, but will
often re-descend and emerge from under its rim as if, not a definite
mechanical propulsion upwards, but rather a conscious desire to reach
the air by hook or crook were the main-spring of his activity. Goltz
concluded from this that the hemispheres are not the sole seal of
intellect in frogs. He made the same inference from observing that a
brainless frog will turn over from his back to his belly when one of
his legs is sewed up, although the movements required are then very
different from those excited under normal circumstances by the same
annoying position. They seem determined, consequently, not merely by
the antecedent irritant, but by the final end,--though the irritant of
course is what makes the end desired.

Another brilliant German author, Liebmann,[2] argues against the
brain's mechanism accounting for mental action, by very similar
considerations. A machine as such, he says, will bring forth right
results when it is in good order, and wrong results if out of repair.
But both kinds of result flow with equally fatal necessity from their
conditions. We cannot suppose the clock-work whose structure fatally
determines it to a certain rate of speed, noticing that this speed is
too slow or too fast and vainly trying to correct it. Its conscience,
if it have any, should be as good as that of the best chronometer, for
both alike obey equally well the same eternal mechanical laws--laws
from behind. But if the _brain_ be out of order and the man says "Twice
four are two," instead of "Twice four are eight," or else "I must go to
the coal to buy the wharf," instead of "I must go to the wharf to buy
the coal," instantly there arises a consciousness of error. The wrong
performance, though it obey the same mechanical law as the right, is
nevertheless condemned,--condemned as contradicting the inner law--the
law from in front, the purpose or ideal for which the brain _should_
act, whether it do so or not.

We need not discuss here whether these writers in drawing their
conclusion have done justice to all the premises I involved in the
cases they treat of. We quote their arguments only to show how they
appeal to the principle that _no actions but such as are done for an
end, and show a choice of means, can be called indubitable expressions
of Mind_.

I shall then adopt this as the criterion by which to circumscribe the
subject-matter of this work so far as action enters into it. Many
nervous performances will therefore be unmentioned, as being purely
physiological. Nor will the anatomy of the nervous system and organs of
sense be described anew. The reader will find in H. N. Martin's 'Human
Body,' in G. T. Ladd's 'Physiological Psychology,' and in all the other
standard Anatomies and Physiologies, a mass of information which we
must regard as preliminary and take for granted in the present work.[3]
Of the functions of the cerebral hemispheres, however, since they
directly subserve consciousness, it will be well to give some little
account.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Cf._ Geo. T. Ladd: Elements of Physiological Psychology (1887),
pt. iii, chap. iii, §§ 9, 12.

[2] Zur Analysis der Wirklichkeit, p. 489.

[3] Nothing is easier than to familiarize one's self with the mammalian
brain. Get a sheep's head, a small saw, chisel, scalpel and forceps
(all three can best be had from a surgical-instrument maker), and
unravel its parts either by the aid of a human dissecting book, such as
Holden's 'Manual of Anatomy,' or by the specific directions _ad hoc_
given in such books as Foster and Langley's 'Practical Physiology'
(Macmillan) or Morrell's 'Comparative Anatomy and Dissection of
Mammalia' (Longmans).




CHAPTER II.

THE FUNCTIONS OF THE BRAIN.


If I begin chopping the foot of a tree, its branches are unmoved by my
act, and its leaves murmur as peacefully as ever in the wind. If, on
the contrary, I do violence to the foot of a fellow-man, the rest of
his body instantly responds to the aggression by movements of alarm or
defence. The reason of this difference is that the man has a nervous
system whilst the tree has none; and the function of the nervous system
is to bring each part into harmonious co-operation with every other.
The afferent nerves, when excited by some physical irritant, be this
as gross in its mode of operation as a chopping axe or as subtle as
the waves of light, conveys the excitement to the nervous centres. The
commotion set up in the centres does not stop there, but discharges
itself, if at all strong, through the efferent nerves into muscles
and glands, exciting movements of the limbs and viscera, or acts of
secretion, which vary with the animal, and with the irritant applied.
These acts of response have usually the common character of being of
service. They ward off the noxious stimulus and support the beneficial
one; whilst if, in itself indifferent, the stimulus be a sign of some
distant circumstance of practical importance, the animal's acts are
addressed to this circumstance so as to avoid its perils or secure its
benefits, as the case may be. To take a common example, if I hear the
conductor calling 'All aboard!' as I enter the depot, my heart first
stops, then palpitates, and my legs respond to the air-waves falling
on my tympanum by quickening their movements. If I stumble as I run,
the sensation of falling provokes a movement of the hands towards the
direction of the fall, the effect of which is to shield the body from
too sudden a shock. If a cinder enter my eye, its lids close forcibly
and a copious flow of tears tends to wash it out.

These three responses to a sensational stimulus differ, however, in
many respects. The closure of the eye and the lachrymation are quite
involuntary, and so is the disturbance of the heart. Such involuntary
responses we know as 'reflex' acts. The motion of the arms to break the
shock of falling may also be called reflex, since it occurs too quickly
to be deliberately intended. Whether it be instinctive or whether it
result from the pedestrian education of childhood may be doubtful; it
is, at any rate, less automatic than the previous acts, for a man might
by conscious effort learn to perform it more skilfully, or even to
suppress it altogether. Actions of this kind, into which instinct and
volition enter upon equal terms, have been called 'semi-reflex.' The
act of running towards the train, on the other hand, has no instinctive
element about it. It is purely the result of education, and is preceded
by a consciousness of the purpose to be attained and a distinct mandate
of the will. It is a 'voluntary act.' Thus the animal's reflex and
voluntary performances shade into each other gradually, being connected
by acts which may often occur automatically, but may also be modified
by conscious intelligence.

An outside observer, unable to perceive the accompanying consciousness,
might be wholly at a loss to discriminate between the automatic acts
and those which volition escorted. But if the criterion of mind's
existence be the choice of the proper means for the attainment of a
supposed end, all the acts seem to be inspired by intelligence, for
_appropriateness_ characterizes them all alike. This fact, now, has led
to two quite opposite theories about the relation to consciousness of
the nervous functions. Some authors, finding that the higher voluntary
ones seem to require the guidance of feeling, conclude that over the
lowest reflexes some such feeling also presides, though it may be a
feeling of which _we_ remain unconscious. Others, finding that reflex
and semi-automatic acts may, notwithstanding their appropriateness,
take place with an unconsciousness apparently complete, fly to the
opposite extreme and maintain that the appropriateness even of
voluntary actions owes nothing to the fact that consciousness attends
them. They are, according to these writers, results of physiological
mechanism pure and simple. In a near chapter we shall return to this
controversy again. Let us now look a little more closely at the brain
and at the ways in which its states may be supposed to condition those
of the mind.


THE FROG'S NERVE-CENTRES.


Both the minute anatomy and the detailed physiology of the brain are
achievements of the present generation, or rather we may say (beginning
with Meynert) of the past twenty years. Many points are still obscure
and subject to controversy; but a general way of conceiving the organ
has been reached on all hands which in its main feature seems not
unlikely to stand, and which even gives a most plausible scheme of the
way in which cerebral and mental operations go hand in hand.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--_C H_, cerebral Hemispheres; _O Th_, Optic
Thalami; _O L_, Optic Lobes; _Cb_, Cerebellum; _M O_, Medulla
Oblongata; _S C_, Spinal cord.]

The best way to enter the subject will be to take a lower creature,
like a frog, and study by the vivisectional method the functions of
his different nerve-centres. The frog's nerve-centres are figured
in the accompanying diagram, which needs no further explanation. I
will first proceed to state what happens when various amounts of the
anterior parts are removed, in different frogs, in the way in which an
ordinary student removes them; that is, with no extreme precautions
as to the purity of the operation. We shall in this way reach a very
simple conception of the functions of the various centres, involving
the strongest possible contrast between the cerebral hemispheres and
the lower lobes. This sharp conception will have didactic advantages,
for it is often very instructive to start with too simple a formula
and correct it later on. Our first formula, as we shall later see,
will have to be softened down somewhat by the results of more careful
experimentation both on frogs and birds, and by those of the most
recent observations on dogs, monkeys, and man. But it will put us,
from the outset, in clear possession of some fundamental notions and
distinctions which we could otherwise not gain so well, and none of
which the later more completed view will overturn.

If, then, we reduce the frog's nervous system to the spinal cord
alone, by making a section behind the base of the skull, between the
spinal cord and the medulla oblongata, thereby cutting off the brain
from all connection with the rest of the body, the frog will still
continue to live, but with a very peculiarly modified activity. It
ceases to breathe or swallow; it lies flat on its belly, and does not,
like a normal frog, sit up on its fore paws, though its hind legs
are kept, as usual, folded against its body and immediately resume
this position if drawn out. If thrown on its back, it lies there
quietly, without turning over like a normal frog. Locomotion and voice
seem entirely abolished. If we suspend it by the nose, and irritate
different portions of its skin by acid, it performs a set of remarkable
'defensive' movements calculated to wipe away the irritant. Thus, if
the breast be touched, both fore paws will rub it vigorously; if we
touch the outer side of the elbow, the hind foot of the same side
will rise directly to the spot and wipe it. The back of the foot will
rub the knee if that be attacked, whilst if the foot be cut away, the
stump will make ineffectual movements, and then, in many frogs, a pause
will come, as if for deliberation, succeeded by a rapid passage of the
opposite unmutilated foot to the acidulated spot.

The most striking character of all these movements, after their
teleological appropriateness, is their precision. They vary, in
sensitive frogs and with a proper amount of irritation, so little as
almost to resemble in their machine-like regularity the performances of
a jumping-jack, whose legs must twitch whenever you pull the string.
The spinal cord of the frog thus contains arrangements of cells and
fibres fitted to convert skin irritations into movements of defence. We
may call it the _centre for defensive movements_ in this animal. We may
indeed go farther than this, and by cutting the spinal cord in various
places find that its separate segments are independent mechanisms,
for appropriate activities of the head and of the arms and legs
respectively. The segment governing the arms is especially active,
in male frogs, in the breeding season; and these members alone with
the breast and back appertaining to them, everything else being cut
away, will then actively grasp a finger placed between them and remain
hanging to it for a considerable time.

The spinal cord in other animals has analogous powers. Even in man
it makes movements of defence. Paraplegics draw up their legs when
tickled; and Robin, on tickling the breast of a criminal an hour after
decapitation, saw the arm and hand move towards the spot. Of the lower
functions of the mammalian cord, studied so ably by Goltz and others,
this is not the place to speak.

If, in a second animal, the cut be made just behind the optic lobes so
that the cerebellum and medulla oblongata remain attached to the cord,
then swallowing, breathing, crawling, and a rather enfeebled jumping
and swimming are added to the movements previously observed.[4] There
are other reflexes too. The animal, thrown on his back, immediately
turns over to his belly. Placed in a shallow bowl, which is floated on
water and made to rotate, he responds to the rotation by first turning
his head and then waltzing around with his entire body, in the opposite
direction to the whirling of the bowl. If his support be tilted so that
his head points downwards, he points it up; he points it down if it be
pointed upwards, to the right if it be pointed to the left, etc. But
his reactions do not go farther than these movements of the head. He
will not, like frogs whose thalami are preserved, climb up a board if
the latter be tilted, but will slide off it to the ground.

If the cut be made on another frog between the thalami and the optic
lobes, the locomotion both on land and water becomes quite normal, and,
in addition to the reflexes already shown by the lower centres, he
croaks regularly whenever he is pinched under the arms. He compensates
rotations, etc., by movements of the head, and turns over from his
back; but still drops off his tilted board. As his optic nerves are
destroyed by the usual operation, it is impossible to say whether he
will avoid obstacles placed in his path.

When, finally, a frog's cerebral hemispheres alone are cut off by a
section between them and the thalami which preserves the latter, an
unpractised observer would not at first suspect anything abnormal
about the animal. Not only is he capable, on proper instigation, of
all the acts already described, but he guides himself by sight, so
that if an obstacle be set up between him and the light, and he be
forced to move forward, he either jumps over it or swerves to one
side. He manifests sexual passion at the proper season, and, unlike an
altogether brainless frog, which embraces anything placed between his
arms, postpones this reflex act until a female of his own species is
provided. Thus far, as aforesaid, a person unfamiliar with frogs might
not suspect a mutilation; but even such a person would soon remark the
almost entire absence of spontaneous motion--that is, motion unprovoked
by any _present_ incitation of sense. The continued movements of
swimming, performed by the creature in the water, seem to be the fatal
result of the contact of that fluid with its skin. They cease when a
stick, for example, touches his hands. This is a sensible irritant
towards which the feet are automatically drawn by reflex action, and
on which the animal remains sitting. He manifests no hunger, and will
suffer a fly to crawl over his nose unsnapped at. Fear, too, seems
to have deserted him. In a word, he is an extremely complex machine
whose actions, so far as they go, tend to self-preservation; but still
a _machine_, in this sense--that it seems to contain no incalculable
element. By applying the right sensory stimulus to him we are almost
as certain of getting a fixed response as an organist is of hearing a
certain tone when he pulls out a certain stop.

But now if to the lower centres we add the cerebral hemispheres,
or if, in other words, we make an intact animal the subject of our
observations, all this is changed. In addition to the previous
responses to present incitements of sense, our frog now goes through
long and complex acts of locomotion _spontaneously_, or as if moved by
what in ourselves we should call an idea. His reactions to outward
stimuli vary their form, too. Instead of making simple defensive
movements with his hind legs like a headless frog if touched, or of
giving one or two leaps and then sitting still like a hemisphereless
one, he makes persistent and varied efforts at escape, as if, not the
mere contact of the physiologist's hand, but the notion of danger
suggested by it were now his spur. Led by the feeling of hunger, too,
he goes in search of insects, fish, or smaller frogs, and varies his
procedure with each species of victim. The physiologist cannot by
manipulating him elicit croaking, crawling up a board, swimming or
stopping, at will. His conduct has become incalculable. We can no
longer foretell it exactly. Effort to escape is his dominant reaction,
but he _may_ do anything else, even swell up and become perfectly
passive in our hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such are the phenomena commonly observed, and such the impressions
which one naturally receives. Certain general conclusions follow
irresistibly. First of all the following:

_The acts of all the centres involve the use of the same muscles._ When
a headless frog's hind leg wipes the acid, he calls into play all the
leg-muscles which a frog with his full medulla oblongata and cerebellum
uses when he turns from his back to his belly. Their contractions are,
however, _combined_ differently in the two cases, so that the results
vary