# The Kybalion
Author: Three Initiates
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #14209
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:19:20.498935
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

THE KYBALION

A Study of
The Hermetic Philosophy of
Ancient Egypt and
Greece


BY
THREE INITIATES


"THE LIPS OF WISDOM ARE CLOSED, EXCEPT TO THE
EARS OF UNDERSTANDING"



1912

COPYRIGHT 1912

ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED BY

THE YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY
MASONIC TEMPLE
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

ISBN 0 911662-25-1


TO
HERMES TRISMEGISTUS


KNOWN BY THE ANCIENT
EGYPTIANS AS

"THE GREAT GREAT"
AND
"MASTER OF MASTERS"

THIS LITTLE VOLUME OF HERMETIC TEACHING
IS REVERENTLY DEDICATED



Table of Contents

  I.    The Hermetic Philosophy
  II.   The Seven Hermetic Principles
        1.  The Principle of Mentalism
        2.  The Principle of Correspondence
        3.  The Principle of Vibration
        4.  The Principle of Polarity
        5.  The Principle of Rhythm
        6.  The Principle of Cause and Effect
        7.  The Principle of Gender
  III.  Mental Transmutation
  IV.   The All
  V.    The Mental Universe
  VI.   The Divine Paradox
  VII.  "The All" in All
  VIII. Planes of Correspondence
  IX.   Vibration
  X.    Polarity
  XI.   Rhythm
  XII.  Causation
  XIII. Gender
  XIV.  Mental Gender
  XV.   Hermetic Axioms



INTRODUCTION

We take great pleasure in presenting to the attention of students and
investigators of the Secret Doctrines this little work based upon the
world-old Hermetic Teachings. There has been so little written upon this
subject, not withstanding the countless references to the Teachings in
the many works upon occultism, that the many earnest searchers after the
Arcane Truths will doubtless welcome the appearance of this present
volume.

The purpose of this work is not the enunciation of any special
philosophy or doctrine, but rather is to give to the students a
statement of the Truth that will serve to reconcile the many bits of
occult knowledge that they may have acquired, but which are apparently
opposed to each other and which often serve to discourage and disgust
the beginner in the study. Our intent is not to erect a new Temple of
Knowledge, but rather to place in the hands of the student a Master-Key
with which he may open the many inner doors in the Temple of Mystery
through the main portals he has already entered.

There is no portion of the occult teachings possessed by the world which
have been so closely guarded as the fragments of the Hermetic Teachings
which have come down to us over the tens of centuries which have elapsed
since the lifetime of its great founder, Hermes Trismegistus, the
"scribe of the gods," who dwelt in old Egypt in the days when the
present race of men was in its infancy. Contemporary with Abraham, and,
if the legends be true, an instructor of that venerable sage, Hermes
was, and is, the Great Central Sun of Occultism, whose rays have served
to illumine the countless teachings which have been promulgated since
his time. All the fundamental and basic teachings embedded in the
esoteric teachings of every race may be traced back to Hermes. Even the
most ancient teachings of India undoubtedly have their roots in the
original Hermetic Teachings.

From the land of the Ganges many advanced occultists wandered to the
land of Egypt, and sat at the feet of the Master. From him they obtained
the Master-Key which explained and reconciled their divergent views, and
thus the Secret Doctrine was firmly established. From other lands also
came the learned ones, all of whom regarded Hermes as the Master of
Masters, and his influence was so great that in spite of the many
wanderings from the path on the part of the centuries of teachers in
these different lands, there may still be found a certain basic
resemblance and correspondence which underlies the many and often quite
divergent theories entertained and taught by the occultists of these
different lands today. The student of Comparative Religions will be able
to perceive the influence of the Hermetic Teachings in every religion
worthy of the name, now known to man, whether it be a dead religion or
one in full vigor in our own times. There is always certain
correspondence in spite of the contradictory features, and the Hermetic
Teachings act as the Great Reconciler.

The lifework of Hermes seems to have been in the direction of planting
the great Seed-Truth which has grown and blossomed in so many strange
forms, rather than to establish a school of philosophy which would
dominate, the world's thought. But, nevertheless, the original truths
taught by him have been kept intact in their original purity by a few
men each age, who, refusing great numbers of half-developed students and
followers, followed the Hermetic custom and reserved their truth for the
few who were ready to comprehend and master it. From lip to ear the
truth has been handed down among the few. There have always been a few
Initiates in each generation, in the various lands of the earth, who
kept alive the sacred flame of the Hermetic Teachings, and such have
always been willing to use their lamps to re-light the lesser lamps of
the outside world, when the light of truth grew dim, and clouded by
reason of neglect, and when the wicks became clogged with foreign
matter. There were always a few to tend faithfully the altar of the
Truth, upon which was kept alight the Perpetual Lamp of Wisdom. These
men devoted their lives to the labor of love which the poet has so well
stated in his lines:

     "O, let not the flame die out! Cherished age after age
     in its dark cavern--in its holy temples cherished. Fed
     by pure ministers of love--let not the flame die out!"

These men have never sought popular approval, nor numbers of followers.
They are indifferent to these things, for they know how few there are in
each generation who are ready for the truth, or who would recognize it
if it were presented to them. They reserve the "strong meat for men,"
while others furnish the "milk for babes." They reserve their pearls of
wisdom for the few elect, who recognize their value and who wear them in
their crowns, instead of casting them before the materialistic vulgar
swine, who would trample them in the mud and mix them with their
disgusting mental food. But still these men have never forgotten or
overlooked the original teachings of Hermes, regarding the passing on of
the words of truth to those ready to receive it, which teaching is
stated in The Kybalion as follows: "Where fall the footsteps of the
Master, the ears of those ready for his Teaching open wide." And again:
"When the ears of the student are ready to hear, then cometh the lips to
fill them with wisdom." But their customary attitude has always been
strictly in accordance with the other Hermetic aphorism, also in The
Kybalion: "The lips of Wisdom are closed, except to the ears of
Understanding."

There are those who have criticized this attitude of the Hermetists, and
who have claimed that they did not manifest the proper spirit in their
policy of seclusion and reticence. But a moment's glance back over the
pages of history will show the wisdom of the Masters, who knew the folly
of attempting to teach to the world that which it was neither ready or
willing to receive. The Hermetists have never sought to be martyrs, and
have, instead, sat silently aside with a pitying smile on their closed
lips, while the "heathen raged noisily about them" in their customary
amusement of putting to death and torture the honest but misguided
enthusiasts who imagined that they could force upon a race of barbarians
the truth capable of being understood only by the elect who had advanced
along The Path.

And the spirit of persecution has not as yet died out in the land. There
are certain Hermetic Teachings, which, if publicly promulgated, would
bring down upon the teachers a great cry of scorn and revilement from
the multitude, who would again raise the cry of "Crucify! Crucify."

In this little work we have endeavored to give you an idea of the
fundamental teachings of The Kybalion, striving to give you the working
Principles, leaving you to apply therm yourselves, rather than
attempting to work out the teaching in detail. If you are a true
student, you will be able to work out and apply these Principles--if
not, then you must develop yourself into one, for otherwise the Hermetic
Teachings will be as "words, words, words" to you.

THE THREE INITIATES.



CHAPTER I

THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY

    "The lips of wisdom are closed, except to the ears
    of Understanding"--The Kybalion.

From old Egypt have come the fundamental esoteric and occult teachings
which have so strongly influenced the philosophies of all races, nations
and peoples, for several thousand years. Egypt, the home of the Pyramids
and the Sphinx, was the birthplace of the Hidden Wisdom and Mystic
Teachings. From her Secret Doctrine all nations have borrowed. India,
Persia, Chaldea, Medea, China, Japan, Assyria, ancient Greece and Rome,
and other ancient countries partook liberally at the feast of knowledge
which the Hierophants and Masters of the Land of Isis so freely provided
for those who came prepared to partake of the great store of Mystic and
Occult Lore which the masterminds of that ancient land had gathered
together.

In ancient Egypt dwelt the great Adepts and Masters who have never been
surpassed, and who seldom have been equaled, during the centuries that
have taken their processional flight since the days of the Great Hermes.
In Egypt was located the Great Lodge of Lodges of the Mystics. At the
doors of her Temples entered the Neophytes who afterward, as
Hierophants, Adepts, and Masters, traveled to the four corners of the
earth, carrying with them the precious knowledge which they were ready,
anxious, and willing to pass on to those who were ready to receive the
same. All students of the Occult recognize the debt that they owe to
these venerable Masters of that ancient land.

But among these great Masters of Ancient Egypt there once dwelt one of
whom Masters hailed as "The Master of Masters." This man, if "man"
indeed he was, dwelt in Egypt in the earliest days. He was known as
Hermes Trismegistus. He was the father of the Occult Wisdom; the founder
of Astrology; the discoverer of Alchemy. The details of his life story
are lost to history, owing to the lapse of the years, though several of
the ancient countries disputed with each other in their claims to the
honor of having furnished his birthplace--and this thousands of years
ago. The date of his sojourn in Egypt, in that his last incarnation on
this planet, is not now known, but it has been fixed at the early days
of the oldest dynasties of Egypt--long before the days of Moses. The
best authorities regard him as a contemporary of Abraham, and some of
the Jewish traditions go so far as to claim that Abraham acquired a
portion of his mystic knowledge from Hermes himself.

As the years rolled by after his passing from this plane of life
(tradition recording that he lived three hundred years in the flesh),
the Egyptians deified Hermes, and made him one of their gods, under the
name of Thoth. Years after, the people of Ancient Greece also made him
one of their many gods--calling him "Hermes, the god of Wisdom." The
Egyptians revered his memory for many centuries-yes, tens of centuries--
calling him "the Scribe of the Gods," and bestowing upon him,
distinctively, his ancient title, "Trismegistus," which means "the
thrice-great"; "the great-great"; "the greatest-great"; etc. In all the
ancient lands, the name of Hermes Trismegistus was revered, the name
being synonymous with the "Fount of Wisdom."

Even to this day, we use the term "hermetic" in the sense of "secret";
"sealed so that nothing can escape"; etc., and this by reason of the
fact that the followers of Hermes always observed the principle of
secrecy in their teachings. They did not believe in "casting pearls
before swine," but rather held to the teaching "milk for babes"; "meat
for strong men," both of which maxims are familiar to readers of the
Christian scriptures, but both of which had been used by the Egyptians
for centuries before the Christian era.

And this policy of careful dissemination of the truth has always
characterized the Hermetics, even unto the present day. The Hermetic
Teachings are to be found in all lands, among all religions, but never
identified with any particular country, nor with any particular
religious sect. This because of the warning of the ancient teachers
against allowing the Secret Doctrine to become crystallized into a
creed. The wisdom of this caution is apparent to all students of
history. The ancient occultism of India and Persia degenerated, and was
largely lost, owing to the fact that the teachers became priests, and so
mixed theology with the philosophy, the result being that the occultism
of India and Persia has been gradually lost amidst the mass of religious
superstition, cults, creeds and "gods." So it was with Ancient Greece
and Rome. So it was with the Hermetic Teachings of the Gnostics and
Early Christians, which were lost at the time of Constantine, whose iron
hand smothered philosophy with the blanket of theology, losing to the
Christian Church that which was its very essence and spirit, and causing
it to grope throughout several centuries before it found the way back to
its ancient faith, the indications apparent to all careful observers in
this Twentieth Century being that the Church is now struggling to get
back to its ancient mystic teachings.

But there were always a few faithful souls who kept alive the Flame,
tending it carefully, and not allowing its light to become extinguished.
And thanks to these staunch hearts, and fearless minds, we have the
truth still with us.  But it is not found in books, to any great extent.
It has been passed along from Master to Student; from Initiate to
Hierophant; from lip to ear. When it was written down at all, its
meaning was veiled in terms of alchemy and astrology so that only those
possessing the key could read it aright. This was made necessary in
order to avoid the persecutions of the theologians of the Middle Ages,
who fought the Secret Doctrine with fire and sword; stake, gibbet and
cross. Even to this day there will be found but few reliable books on
the Hermetic Philosophy, although there are countless references to it
in many books written on various phases of Occultism. And yet, the
Hermetic Philosophy is the only Master Key which will open all the doors
of the Occult Teachings!

In the early days, there was a compilation of certain Basic Hermetic
Doctrines, passed on from teacher to student, which was known as "THE
KYBALION," the exact significance and meaning of the term having been
lost for several centuries. This teaching, however, is known to many to
whom it has descended, from mouth to ear, on and on throughout the
centuries. Its precepts have never been written down, or printed, so far
as we know. It was merely a collection of maxims, axioms, and precepts,
which were non-understandable to outsiders, but which were readily
understood by students, after the axioms, maxims, and precepts had been
explained and exemplified by the Hermetic Initiates to their Neophytes.
These teachings really constituted the basic principles of "The Art of
Hermetic Alchemy," which, contrary to the general belief, dealt in the
mastery of Mental Forces, rather than Material Elements-the
Transmutation of one kind of Mental Vibrations into others, instead of
the changing of one kind of metal into another. The legends of the
"Philosopher's Stone" which would turn base metal into Gold, was an
allegory relating to Hermetic Philosophy, readily understood by all
students of true Hermeticism.

In this little book, of which this is the First Lesson, we invite our
students to examine into the Hermetic Teachings, as set forth in THE
KYBALION, and as explained by ourselves, humble students of the
Teachings, who, while bearing the title of Initiates, are still students
at the feet of HERMES, the Master. We herein give you many of the
maxims, axioms and precepts of THE KYBALION, accompanied by explanations
and illustrations which we deem likely to render the teachings more
easily comprehended by the modern student, particularly as the original
text is purposely veiled in obscure terms.

The original maxims, axioms, and precepts of THE KYBALION are printed
herein, in italics, the proper credit being given. Our own work is
printed in the regular way, in the body of the work. We trust that the
many students to whom we now offer this little work will derive as much
benefit from the study of its pages as have the many who have gone on
before, treading the same Path to Mastery throughout the centuries that
have passed since the times of HERMES TRISMEGISTUS--the Master of
Masters--the Great-Great. In the words of "THE KYBALION":

    "Where fall the footsteps of the Master, the ears of those
    ready for his Teaching open wide."--The Kybalion.

    "When the ears of the student are ready to hear, then cometh
    the lips to fill them with Wisdom."--The Kybalion.

So that according to the Teachings, the passage of this book to those
ready for the instruction will attract the attention of such as are
prepared to receive the Teaching. And, likewise, when the pupil is ready
to receive the truth, then will this little book come to him, or her.
Such is The Law. The Hermetic Principle of Cause and Effect, in its
aspect of The Law of Attraction, will bring lips and ear together--pupil
and book in company. So mote it be!



CHAPTER II

THE SEVEN HERMETIC PRINCIPLES

    "The Principles of Truth are Seven; he who knows these,
    understandingly, possesses the Magic Key before whose
    touch all the Doors of the Temple fly open."--The Kybalion.

The Seven Hermetic Principles, upon which the entire Hermetic Philosophy
is based, are as follows:

    1. The Principle of Mentalism.
    2. The Principle of Correspondence.
    3. The Principle of Vibration.
    4. The Principle of Polarity.
    5. The Principle of Rhythm.
    6. The Principle of Cause and Effect.
    7. The Principle of Gender.

These Seven Principles will be discussed and explained as we proceed
with these lessons. A short explanation of each, however, may as well be
given at this point.

1.  The Principle of Mentalism

    "THE ALL IS MIND; The Universe is Mental."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "All is Mind." It explains that
THE ALL (which is the Substantial Reality underlying all the outward
manifestations and appearances which we know under the terms of "The
Material Universe"; the "Phenomena of Life"; "Matter"; "Energy"; and, in
short, all that is apparent to our material senses) is SPIRIT which in
itself is UNKNOWABLE and UNDEFINABLE, but which may be considered and
thought of as AN UNIVERSAL, INFINITE, LIVING MIND. It also explains that
all the phenomenal world or universe is simply a Mental Creation of THE
ALL, subject to the Laws of Created Things, and that the universe, as a
whole, and in its parts or units, has its existence in the Mind of THE
ALL, in which Mind we "live and move and have our being." This
Principle, by establishing the Mental Nature of the Universe, easily
explains all of the varied mental and psychic phenomena that occupy such
a large portion of the public attention, and which, without such
explanation, are non-understandable and defy scientific treatment. An
understanding of this great Hermetic Principle of Mentalism enables the
individual to readily grasp the laws of the Mental Universe, and to
apply the same to his well-being and advancement. The Hermetic Student
is enabled to apply intelligently the great Mental Laws, instead of
using them in a haphazard manner. With the Master-Key in his possession,
the student may unlock the many doors of the mental and psychic temple
of knowledge, and enter the same freely and intelligently. This
Principle explains the true nature of "Energy," "Power," and "Matter,"
and why and how all these are subordinate to the Mastery of Mind. One of
the old Hermetic Masters wrote, long ages ago: "He who grasps the truth
of the Mental Nature of the Universe is well advanced on The Path to
Mastery." And these words are as true today as at the time they were
first written. Without this Master-Key, Mastery is impossible, and the
student knocks in vain at the many doors of The Temple.

2.  The Principle of Correspondence

    "As above, so below; as below, so above."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that there is always a Correspondence
between the laws and phenomena of the various planes of Being and Life.
The old Hermetic axiom ran in these words: "As above, so below; as
below, so above." And the grasping of this Principle gives one the means
of solving many a dark paradox, and hidden secret of Nature. There are
planes beyond our knowing, but when we apply the Principle of
Correspondence to them we are able to understand much that would
otherwise be unknowable to us. This Principle is of universal
application and manifestation, on the various planes of the material,
mental, and spiritual universe--it is an Universal Law. The ancient
Hermetists considered this Principle as one of the most important mental
instruments by which man was able to pry aside the obstacles which hid
from view the Unknown. Its use even tore aside the Veil of Isis to the
extent that a glimpse of the face of the goddess might be caught. Just
as a knowledge of the Principles of Geometry enables man to measure
distant suns and their movements, while seated in his observatory,
so a knowledge of the Principle of Correspondence enables Man to reason
intelligently from the Known to the Unknown.  Studying the monad, he
understands the archangel.

3.  The Principle of Vibration

    "Nothing rests; everything moves; everything vibrates."--The
    Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "everything is in motion";
"everything vibrates"; "nothing is at rest"; facts which Modern Science
endorses, and which each new scientific discovery tends to verify.  And
yet this Hermetic Principle was enunciated thousands of years ago, by
the Masters of Ancient Egypt. This Principle explains that the
differences between different manifestations of Matter, Energy, Mind,
and even Spirit, result largely from varying rates of Vibration. From
THE ALL, which is Pure Spirit, down to the grossest form of Matter, all
is in vibration--the higher the vibration, the higher the position in
the scale. The vibration of Spirit is at such an infinite rate of
intensity and rapidity that it is practically at rest--just as a rapidly
moving wheel seems to be motionless. And at the other end of the scale,
there are gross forms of matter whose vibrations are so low as to seem
at rest. Between these poles, there are millions upon millions of
varying degrees of vibration. From corpuscle and electron, atom and
molecule, to worlds and universes, everything is in vibratory motion.
This is also true on the planes of energy and force (which are but
varying degrees of vibration); and also on the mental planes (whose
states depend upon vibrations); and even on to the spiritual planes.
An understanding of this Principle, with the appropriate formulas,
enables Hermetic students to control their own mental vibrations as well
as those of others. The Masters also apply this Principle to the
conquering of Natural phenomena, in various ways. "He who understands
the Principle of Vibration, has grasped the scepter of power," says one
of the old writers.

4.  The Principle of Polarity

    "Everything is Dual; everything has poles; everything has its
    pair of opposites; like and unlike are the same; opposites are
    identical in nature, but different in degree; extremes meet;
    all truths are but half-truths; all paradoxes may be
    reconciled."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that "everything is dual"; "everything
has two poles"; "everything has its pair of opposites," all of which
were old Hermetic axioms. It explains the old paradoxes, that have
perplexed so many, which have been stated as follows: "Thesis and
antithesis are identical in nature, but different in degree"; "opposites
are the same, differing only in degree"; "the pairs of opposites may be
reconciled"; "extremes meet"; "everything is and isn't, at the same
time"; "all truths are but half-truths"; "every truth is half-false";
"there are two sides to everything," etc., etc., etc. It explains that
in everything there are two poles, or opposite aspects, and that
"opposites" are really only the two extremes of the same thing, with
many varying degrees between them. To illustrate:  Heat and Cold,
although "opposites," are really the same thing, the differences
consisting merely of degrees of the same thing. Look at your thermometer
and see if you can discover where "heat" terminates and "cold" begins!
There is no such thing as "absolute heat" or "absolute cold"--the two
terms "heat" and "cold" simply indicate varying degrees of the same
thing, and that "same thing" which manifests as "heat" and "cold"
is merely a form, variety, and rate of Vibration. So "heat" and "cold"
are simply the "two poles" of that which we call "Heat"--and the
phenomena attendant thereupon are manifestations of the Principle of
Polarity. The same Principle manifests in the case of "Light and
Darkness," which are the same thing, the difference consisting of
varying degrees between the two poles of the phenomena. Where does
"darkness" leave off, and "light" begin? What is the difference between
"Large and Small"? Between "Hard and Soft"? Between "Black and White"?
Between "Sharp and Dull"? Between "Noise and Quiet"? Between "High and
Low"? Between "Positive and Negative"? The Principle of Polarity
explains these paradoxes, and no other Principle can supersede it. The
same Principle operates on the Mental Plane. Let us take a radical and
extreme example--that of "Love and Hate," two mental states apparently
totally different.  And yet there are degrees of Hate and degrees of
Love, and a middle point in which we use the terms "Like or Dislike,"
which shade into each other so gradually that sometimes we are at a loss
to know whether we "like" or "dislike" or "neither." And all are simply
degrees of the same thing, as you will see if you will but think a
moment.  And, more than this (and considered of more importance
by the Hermetists), it is possible to change the vibrations of Hate to
the vibrations of Love, in one's own mind, and in the minds of others.
Many of you, who read these lines, have had personal experiences of the
involuntary rapid transition from Love to Hate, and the reverse, in your
own case and that of others.  And you will therefore realize the
possibility of this being accomplished by the use of the Will, by means
of the Hermetic formulas. "Good and Evil" are but the poles of the same
thing, and the Hermetist understands the art of transmuting Evil into
Good, by means of an application of the Principle of Polarity. In short,
the "Art of Polarization" becomes a phase of "Mental Alchemy" known and
practiced by the ancient and modern Hermetic Masters.  An understanding
of the Principle will enable one to change his own Polarity, as well as
that of others, if he will devote the time and study necessary to master
the art.

5.  The Principle of Rhythm

    "Everything flows, out and in; everything has its tides;
    all things rise and fall; the pendulum-swing manifests in
    everything; the measure of the swing to the right is the
    measure of the swing to the left; rhythm compensates."--The
    Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that in everything there is manifested
a measured motion, to and fro; a flow and inflow; a swing backward and
forward; a pendulum-like movement; a tide-like ebb and flow; a high-tide
and low-tide; between the two poles which exist in accordance with the
Principle of Polarity described a moment ago. There is always an action
and a reaction; an advance and a retreat; a rising and a sinking. This
is in the affairs of the Universe, suns, worlds, men, animals, mind,
energy, and matter.  This law is manifest in the creation and
destruction of worlds; in the rise and fall of nations; in the life of
all things; and finally in the mental states of Man (and it is with this
latter that the Hermetists find the understanding of the Principle most
important). The Hermetists have grasped this Principle, finding its
universal application, and have also discovered certain means to
overcome its effects in themselves by the use of the appropriate
formulas and methods. They apply the Mental Law of Neutralization. They
cannot annul the Principle, or cause it to cease its operation, but they
have learned how to escape its effects upon themselves to a certain
degree depending upon the Mastery of the Principle.  They have learned
how to USE it, instead of being USED BY it. In this and similar
methods, consist the Art of the Hermetists. The Master of Hermetics
polarizes himself at the point at which he desires to rest, and then
neutralizes the Rhythmic swing of the pendulum which would tend to carry
him to the other pole.  All individuals who have attained any degree of
Self-Mastery do this to a certain degree, more or less unconsciously,
but the Master does this consciously, and by the use of his Will, and
attains a degree of Poise and Mental Firmness almost impossible of
belief on the part of the masses who are swung backward and forward like
a pendulum. This Principle and that of Polarity have been closely
studied by the Hermetists, and the methods of counteracting,
neutralizing, and USING them form an important part of the Hermetic
Mental Alchemy.

6.  The Principle of Cause and Effect

    "Every Cause has its Effect; every Effect has its Cause;
    everything happens according to Law; Chance is but a name
    for Law not recognized; there are many planes of causation,
    but nothing escapes the Law."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the fact that there is a Cause for every Effect;
an Effect from every Cause. It explains that:  "Everything Happens
according to Law"; that nothing ever "merely happens"; that there is no
such thing as Chance; that while there are various planes of Cause and
Effect, the higher dominating the lower planes, still nothing ever
entirely escapes the Law. The Hermetists understand the art and methods
of rising above the ordinary plane of Cause and Effect, to a certain
degree, and by mentally rising to a higher plane they become Causers
instead of Effects. The masses of people are carried along, obedient to
environment; the wills and desires of others stronger than themselves;
heredity; suggestion; and other outward causes moving them about like
pawns on the Chessboard of Life. But the Masters, rising to the plane
above, dominate their moods, characters, qualities, and powers, as well
as the environment surrounding them, and become Movers instead of pawns.
They help to PLAY THE GAME OF LIFE, instead of being played and moved
about by other wills and environment. They USE the Principle instead of
being its tools. The Masters obey the Causation of the higher planes,
but they help to RULE on their own plane. In this statement there is
condensed a wealth of Hermetic knowledge--let him read who can.

7.  The Principle of Gender

    "Gender is in everything; everything has its Masculine
    and Feminine Principles; Gender manifests on all
    planes."--The Kybalion.

This Principle embodies the truth that there is GENDER manifested in
everything--the Masculine and Feminine Principles ever at work. This is
true not only of the Physical Plane, but of the Mental and even the
Spiritual Planes. On the Physical Plane, the Principle manifests as SEX,
on the higher planes it takes higher forms, but the Principle is ever
the same.  No creation, physical, mental or spiritual, is possible
without this Principle. An understanding of its laws will throw light on
many a subject that has perplexed the minds of men. The Principle of
Gender works ever in the direction of generation, regeneration, and
creation. Everything, and every person, contains the two Elements or
Principles, or this great Principle, within it, him or her. Every Male
thing has the Female Element also; every Female contains also the Male
Principle.  If you would understand the philosophy of Mental and
Spiritual Creation, Generation, and Re-generation, you must understand
and study this Hermetic Principle. It contains the solution of many
mysteries of Life. We caution you that this Principle has no reference
to the many base, pernicious and degrading lustful theories, teachings
and practices, which are taught under fanciful titles, and which are a
prostitution of the great natural principle of Gender. Such base
revivals of the ancient infamous forms of Phallicism tend to ruin mind,
body and soul, and the Hermetic Philosophy has ever sounded the warning
note against these degraded teachings which tend toward lust,
licentiousness, and perversion of Nature's principles. If you seek such
teachings, you must go elsewhere for them--Hermeticism contains nothing
for you along these lines. To the pure, all things are pure; to the
base, all things are base.



CHAPTER III

MENTAL TRANSMUTATION

    "Mind (as well as metals and elements) may be transmuted,
    from state to state; degree to degree; condition to condition;
    pole to pole; vibration to vibration. True Hermetic Transmutation
    is a Mental Art."--The Kybalion.

As we have stated, the Hermetists were the original alchemists,
astrologers, and psychologists, Hermes having been the founder of these
schools of thought. From astrology has grown modern astronomy; from
alchemy has grown modern chemistry; from the mystic psychology has grown
the modern psychology of the schools. But it must not be supposed that
the ancients were ignorant of that which the modern schools suppose to
be their exclusive and special property. The records engraved on the
stones of Ancient Egypt show conclusively that the ancients had a full
comprehensive knowledge of astronomy, the very building of the Pyramids
showing the connection between their design and the study of
astronomical science. Nor were they ignorant of Chemistry, for the
fragments of the ancient writings show that they were acquainted with
the chemical properties of things; in fact, the ancient theories
regarding physics are being slowly verified by the latest discoveries of
modern science, notably those relating to the constitution of matter.
Nor must it be supposed that they were ignorant of the so-called modern
discoveries in psychology--on the contrary, the Egyptians were
especially skilled in the science of Psychology, particularly in the
branches that the modern schools ignore, but which, nevertheless, are
being uncovered under the name of "psychic science" which is perplexing
the psychologists of to-day, and making them reluctantly admit that
"there may be something in it after all."

The truth is, that beneath the material chemistry, astronomy and
psychology (that is, the psychology in its phase of "brain-action") the
ancients possessed a knowledge of transcendental astronomy, called
astrology; of transcendental chemistry, called alchemy; of
transcendental psychology, called mystic psychology. They possessed the
Inner Knowledge as well as the Outer Knowledge, the latter alone being
possessed by modern scientists. Among the many secret branches of
knowledge possessed by the Hermetists, was that known as Mental
Transmutation, which forms the subject matter of this lesson.

"Transmutation" is a term usually employed to designate the ancient art
of the transmutation of metals--particularly of the base metals into
gold. The word "Transmute" means "to change from one nature, form, or
substance, into another; to transform" (Webster). And accordingly,
"Mental Transmutation" means the art of changing and transforming mental
states, forms, and conditions, into others. So you may see that Mental
Transmutation is the "Art of Mental Chemistry," if you like the term--a
form of practical Mystic Psychology.

But this means far more than appears on the surface. Transmutation,
Alchemy, or Chemistry on the Mental Plane is important enough in its
effects, to be sure, and if the art stopped there it would still be one
of the most important branches of study known to man. But this is only
the beginning. Let us see why!

The first of the Seven Hermetic Principles is the Principle of
Mentalism, the axiom of which is "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is
Mental," which means that the Underlying Reality of the Universe is
Mind; and the Universe itself is Mental--that is, "existing in the Mind
of THE ALL." We shall consider this Principle in succeeding lessons, but
let us see the effect of the principle if it be assumed to be true.

If the Universe is Mental in its nature, then Mental Transmutation must
be the art of CHANGING THE CONDITIONS OF THE UNIVERSE, along the lines
of Matter, Force and mind. So you see, therefore, that Mental
Transmutation is really the "Magic" of which the ancient; writers had so
much to say in their mystical works, and about which they gave so few
practical instructions. If All be Mental, then the art which enables one
to transmute mental conditions must render the Master the controller of
material conditions as well as those ordinarily called "mental."

As a matter of fact, none but advanced Mental Alchemists have been able
to attain the degree of power necessary to control the grosser physical
conditions, such as the control of the elements of Nature; the
production or cessation of tempests; the production and cessation of
earthquakes and other great physical phenomena. But that such men have
existed, and do exist today, is a matter of earnest belief to all
advanced occultists of all schools. That the Masters exist, and have
these powers, the best teachers assure their students, having had
experiences which justify them in such belief and statements. These
Masters do not make public exhibitions of their powers, but seek
seclusion from the crowds of men, in order to better work their may
along the Path of Attainment. We mention their existence, at this point,
merely to call your attention to the fact that their power is entirely
Mental, and operates along the lines of the higher Mental Transmutation,
under the Hermetic Principle of Mentalism.

    "The Universe is Mental"--The Kybalion.

But students and Hermetists of lesser degree than Masters--the Initiates
and Teachers--are able to freely work along the Mental Plane, in Mental
Transmutation. In fact all that we call "psychic phenomena,"; "mental
influence"; "mental science"; "new-thought phenomena," etc., operates
along the same general lines, for there is but one principle involved,
no matter by what name the phenomena be called.

The student and practitioner of Mental Transmutation works among the
Mental Plane, transmuting mental conditions, states, etc., into others,
according to various formulas, more or less efficacious. The various
"treatments," "affirmations," "denials" etc., of the schools of mental
science are but formulas, often quite imperfect and unscientific, of The
Hermetic Art. The majority of modern practitioners are quite ignorant
compared to the ancient masters, for they lack the fundamental knowledge
upon which the work is based.

Not only may the mental states, etc., of one's self be changed or
transmuted by Hermetic Methods; but also the states of others may be,
and are, constantly transmuted in the same way, usually unconsciously,
but often consciously by some understanding the laws and principles, in
cases where the people affected are not informed of the principles of
self-protection. And more than this, as many students and practitioners
of modern mental science know, every material condition depending upon
the minds of other people may be changed or transmuted in accordance
with the earnest desire, will, and "treatments" of person desiring
changed conditions of life. The public are so generally informed
regarding these things at present, that we do not deem it necessary to
mention the same at length, our purpose at this point being merely to
show the Hermetic Principle and Art underlying all of these various
forms of practice, good and evil, for the force can be used in opposite
directions according to the Hermetic Principles of Polarity.

In this little book we shall state the basic principles of Mental
Transmutation, that all who read may grasp the Underlying Principles,
and thus possess the Master-Key that will unlock the many doors of the
Principle of Polarity.

We shall now proceed to a consideration of the first of the Hermetic
Seven Principles--the Principle of Mentalism, in which is explained the
truth that "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is Mental," in the words of
The Kybalion. We ask the close attention, and careful study of this
great Principle, on the part of our students, for it is really the Basic
Principle of the whole Hermetic Philosophy, and of the Hermetic Art of
Mental Transmutation.



CHAPTER IV

THE ALL

    "Under, and back of, the Universe of Time, Space and Change,
    is ever to be found The Substantial Reality--the Fundamental
    Truth."--The Kybalion.

"Substance" means: "that which underlies all outward manifestations; the
essence; the essential reality; the thing in itself," etc. "Substantial"
means: "actually existing; being the essential element; being real," etc.
"Reality" means: "the state of being real; true, enduring; valid; fixed;
permanent; actual," etc.

Under and behind all outward appearances or manifestations, there must
always be a Substantial Reality. This is the Law. Man considering the
Universe, of which he is a unit, sees nothing but change in matter,
forces, and mental states. He sees that nothing really IS, but that
everything is BECOMING and CHANGING. Nothing stands still-everything is
being born, growing, dying-the very instant a thing reaches its height,
it begins to decline--the law of rhythm is in constant operation--there
is no reality, enduring quality, fixity, or substantiality in anything--
nothing is permanent but Change. He sees all things evolving from other
things, and resolving into other things--constant action and reaction;
inflow and outflow; building up and tearing down; creation and
destruction; birth, growth and death. Nothing endures but Change. And if
he be a thinking man, he realizes that all of these changing things must
be but outward appearances or manifestations of some Underlying
Power--some Substantial Reality.

All thinkers, in all lands and in all times, have assumed the necessity
for postulating the existence of this Substantial Reality. All
philosophies worthy of the name have been based upon this thought. Men
have given to this Substantial Reality many names-some have called it by
the term of Deity (under many titles). Others have called it "The
Infinite and Eternal Energy" others have tried to call it "Matter"--but
all have acknowledged its existence. It is self-evident it needs no
argument.

In these lessons we have followed the example of some of the world's
greatest thinkers, both ancient and modern--the Hermetic. Masters--and
have called this Underlying Power--this Substantial Reality--by the
Hermetic name of "THE ALL," which term we consider the most
comprehensive of the many terms applied by Man to THAT which transcends
names and terms.

We accept and teach the view of the great Hermetic thinkers of all
times, as well as of those illumined souls who have reached higher
planes of being, both of whom assert that the inner nature of THE ALL is
UNKNOWABLE. This must be so, for naught by THE ALL itself can comprehend
its own nature and being.

The Hermetists believe and teach that THE ALL, "in itself," is and must
ever be UNKNOWABLE. They regard all the theories, guesses and
speculations of the theologians and metaphysicians regarding the inner
nature of THE ALL, as but the childish efforts of mortal minds to grasp
the secret of the Infinite. Such efforts have always failed and will
always fail, from the very nature of the task. One pursuing such
inquiries travels around and around in the labyrinth of thought, until
he is lost to all sane reasoning, action or conduct, and is utterly
unfitted for the work of life. He is like the squirrel which frantically
runs around and around the circling treadmill wheel of his cage,
traveling ever and yet reaching nowhere--at the end a prisoner still,
and standing just where he started.

And still more presumptuous are those who attempt to ascribe to THE ALL
the personality, qualities, properties, characteristics and attributes
of themselves, ascribing to THE ALL the human emotions, feelings, and
characteristics, even down to the pettiest qualities of mankind, such as
jealousy, susceptibility to flattery and praise, desire for offerings
and worship, and all the other survivals from the days of the childhood
of the race. Such ideas are not worthy of grown men and women, and are
rapidly being discarded.

(At this point, it may be proper for me to state that we make a
distinction between Religion and Theology--between Philosophy and
Metaphysics. Religion, to us, means that intuitional realization of the
existence of THE ALL, and one's relationship to it; while Theology means
the attempts of men to ascribe personality, qualities, and
characteristics to it; their theories regarding its affairs, will,
desires, plans, and designs, and their assumption of the office of ''
middle-men'' between THE ALL and the people. Philosophy, to us, means
the inquiry after knowledge of things knowable and thinkable; while
Metaphysics means the attempt to carry the inquiry over and beyond the
boundaries and into regions unknowable and unthinkable, and with the
same tendency as that of Theology. And consequently, both Religion and
Philosophy mean to us things having roots in Reality, while Theology and
Metaphysics seem like broken reeds, rooted in the quicksands of
ignorance, and affording naught but the most insecure support for the
mind or soul of Man. we do not insist upon our students accepting these
definitions--we mention them merely to show our position.
At any rate, you shall hear very little about Theology and Metaphysics
in these lessons.)

But while the essential nature of THE ALL is Unknowable, there are
certain truths connected with its existence which the human mind finds
itself compelled to accept. And an examination of these reports form a
proper subject of inquiry, particularly as they agree with the reports
of the Illumined on higher planes. And to this inquiry we now invite
you.

    "THAT which is the Fundamental Truth--the Substantial
    Reality--is beyond true naming, but the Wise Men call
    it THE ALL."--The Kybalion.

    "In its Essence, THE ALL is UNKNOWABLE."--The Kybalion.

    "But, the report of Reason must be hospitably received,
    and treated with respect."--The Kybalion.

The human reason, whose reports we must accept so long as we think at
all, informs us as follows regarding THE ALL, and that without
attempting to remove the veil of the Unknowable:

    (1) THE ALL must be ALL that REALLY IS. There can be
    nothing existing outside of THE ALL, else THE ALL would
    not be THE ALL.

    (2) THE ALL must be INFINITE, for there is nothing else
    to define, confine, bound, limit; or restrict THE ALL.
    It must be Infinite in Time, or ETERNAL,--it must have
    always continuously existed, for there is nothing else to
    have ever created it, and something can never evolve from
    nothing, and if it had ever "not been," even for a moment,
    it would not "be" now,--it must continuously exist forever,
    for there is nothing to destroy it, and it can never
    "not-be," even for a moment, because something can never
    become nothing. It must be Infinite in Space--it must be
    Everywhere, for there is no place outside of THE ALL--it
    cannot be otherwise than continuous in Space, without break,
    cessation, separation, or interruption, for there is nothing
    to break, separate, or interrupt its continuity, and nothing
    with which to "fill in the gaps." It must be Infinite in
    Power, or Absolute, for there is nothing to limit, restrict,
    restrain, confine, disturb or condition it--it is subject to
    no other Power, for there is no other Power.

    (3) THE ALL must be IMMUTABLE, or not subject to change in
    its real nature, for there is nothing to work changes upon it
    nothing into which it could change, nor from which it could
    have changed. It cannot be added to nor subtracted from;
    increased nor diminished; nor become greater or lesser in any
    respect whatsoever. It must have always been, and must always
    remain, just what it is now--THE ALL--there has never been,
    is not now, and never will be, anything else into which it
    can change.

THE ALL being Infinite, Absolute, Eternal and Unchangeable it must
follow that anything fi