# Transcendental Magic
Author: Eliphas Levi
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Archive.org/transcendentalma00leviuoft
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:19:26.538036
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

ELIPHAS    LEVl'S 
TRANSCENDENTAL    MAGIC 


iics  Hyatt. 


TRANSCENDENTAL  MAGIC 

ITS  DOCTRINE  AND  RITUAL 


BY 

tiLIPHAS    LfiVI 


A  COMPLETE  TRANSLATION  OF 

"DOGME  ET  RITUEL  DE  LA  HAUTE  MAGIE " 

WITH  A  BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE 


BY 

ARTHUR    EDWARD    WAITE 

AUTHOR  OF  "DEVIL  WORSHIP  IN  FRANCE,"  ETC.  ETC. 


INCLUDING  ALL  THE  ORIGINAL  ENGRAVINGS 
AND  A  PORTRAIT  OF  THE  AUTHOR 


LONDON 
GEORGE    REDWAY 

1896 


»&& 


0* 


BIOGRAPHICAL  PEEFACE 

ELIPHAS  LEVI  ZAHED  is  a  pseudonym  which  was  adopted  in 
his  occult  writings  by  Alphonse  Louis  Constant,  and  it  is 
said  to  be  the  Hebrew  equivalent  of  that  name.  The 
author  of  the  Dogme  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute  Magie  was 
born  in  humble  circumstances  about  the  year  1810,  being 
the  son  of  a  shoemaker.  Giving  evidence  of  unusual 
intelligence  at  an  early  age,  the  priest  of  his  parish  con- 
ceived a  kindly  interest  for  the  obscure  boy,  and  got  him 
on  the  foundation  of  Saint  Sulpice,  where  he  was  educated 
without  charge,  and  with  a  view  to  the  priesthood.  He 
seems  to  have  passed  through  the  course  of  study  at  that 
seminary  in  a  way  which  did  not  disappoint  the  expecta- 
tions raised  concerning  him.  In  addition  to  Greek  and 
Latin,  he  is  believed  to  have  acquired  considerable  knowledge 
of  Hebrew,  though  it  would  be  an  error  to  suppose  that  any 
of  his  published  works  exhibit  special  linguistic  attainments. 
He  entered  on  his  clerical  novitiate,  took  minor  orders,  and 
in  due  course  became  a  deacon,  being  thus  bound  by  a  vow 
of  perpetual  celibacy.  Shortly  after  this  step,  he  was 
suddenly  expelled  from  Saint  Sulpice  for  holding  opinions 
contrary  to  the  teaching  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church. 
The  existing  accounts  of  this  expulsion  are  hazy,  and  in- 
corporate unlikely  elements,  as,  for  example,  that  he  was 
sent  by  his  ecclesiastical  superiors  to  take  duty  in  country 
places,  where  he  preached  with  great  eloquence  what,  how- 
ever, was  doctrinally  unsound ;  but  I  believe  that  there  is 
n<r  precedent  for  the  preaching  of  deacons  in  the  Latin 
Church.  Pending  the  appearance  of  the  biography  which 
has  been  for  some  years  promised  in  France,  we  have  few 
available  materials  for  a  life  of  the  "Abbe""  Constant. 
In  any  case,  he  was  cast  back  upon  the  world,  with  the 
limitations  of  priestly  engagements,  while  the  priestly  career 


Vi  BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE 

was  closed  to  him — and  what  he  did,  or  how  he  contrived 
to  support  himself,  is  unknown.  By  the  year  1839  he  had 
made  some  literary  friendships,  including  that  of  Alphonse 
Esquiros,  the  forgotten  author  of  a  fantastic  romance,  entitled 
"  The  Magician";*  and  Esquiros  introduced  him  to  Ganneau, 
a  distracted  prophet  of  the  period,  who  had  adopted  the 
dress  of  a  woman,  abode  in  a  garret,  and  there  preached  a 
species  of  political  illuminism,  which  was  apparently  con- 
cerned with  the  restoration  of  la  vraie  UgitimiU.  He  was, 
in  fact,  a  second  incarnation  of  Louis  XVII. — "  come  back 
to  earth  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  work  of  regeneration."  t 
Constant  and  Esquiros,  who  had  visited  him  for  the  pur- 
pose of  scoffing,  were  carried  away  by  his  eloquence,  and 
became  his  disciples.  Some  element  of  socialism  must  have 
combined  with  the  illuminism  of  the  visionary,  and  this  ap- 
pears to  have  borne  fruit  in  the  brain  of  Constant,  taking 
shape  ultimately  in  a  book  or  pamphlet,  entitled  "  The  Gospel 
of  Liberty,"  to  which  a  transient  importance  was  attached, 
foolishly  enough,  by  the  imprisonment  of  the  author  for  a 
term  of  six  months.  There  is  some  reason  to  suppose  that 
Esquiros  had  a  hand  in  the  production,  and  also  in  the 
penalty.  His  incarceration  over,  Constant  came  forth  un- 
daunted, still  cleaving  to  his  prophet,  and  undertook  a  kind 
of  apostolic  mission  into  the  provinces,  addressing  the 
country  people,  and  suffering,  as  he  himself  tells  us, 
persecution  from  the  ill-disposed.  I  But  the  prophet  ceased 

*  M.  Papus,  a  contemporary  French  occultist,  in  an  extended  study  of  the 
"Doctrine  of  Eliphas  Levi,"  asks  scornfully:  "  Who  now  remembers  any- 
thing of  Paul  Augnez  or  Esquiros,  journalists  pretending  to  initiation,  and 
posing  as  professors  of  the  occult  sciences  in  the  salons  they  frequented  ? " 
No  doubt  they  are  forgotten,  but  Eliphas  Levi  states,  in  the  Histoire  de  la 
Magie,  that,  by  the  publication  of  his  romance  of  "  The  Magician,"  Esquiros 
founded  a  new  school  of  fantastic  magic,  and  gives  sufficient  account  of  his 
work  to  show  that  it  was  in  parts  excessively  curious. 

t  A  woman  who  was  associated  with  his  mission,  was,  in  like  manner,  sup- 
posed to  have  been  Marie  Antoinette. — See  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  1.  7.,  c.  5. 

J  A  vicious  story,  which  has  received  recently  some  publicity  in  Paris, 
charges  Constant  with  spreading  a  report  of  his  death  soon  after  his  release 
from  prison,  assuming  another  name,  imposing  upon  the  Bishop  of  Eveux, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE  Vll 

to  prophesy,  presumably  for  want  of  an  audience,  and  la 
vraie  Ugitimitd  was  not  restored,  so  the  disciple  returned  to 
Paris,  where,  in  spite  of  the  pledge  of  his  diaconate,  he 
effected  a  runaway  match  with  Mdlle.  Noe'iny,  a  beautiful 
girl  of  sixteen.  This  lady  bore  him  two  children,  who  died 
in  tender  years,  and  subsequently  she  deserted  him.  Her 
husband  is  said  to  have  tried  all  expedients  to  procure  her 
return,*  but  in  vain,  and  she  even  further  asserted  her 
position  by  obtaining  a  legal  annulment  of  her  marriage,  on 
the  ground  that  the  contracting  parties  were  a  minor  and  a 
person  bound  to  celibacy  by  an  irrevocable  vow.  The  lady, 
it  may  be  added,  had  other  domestic  adventures,  ending  in 
a  second  marriage  about  the  year  1872.  Madame  Constant 
was  not  only  very  beautiful,  but  exceedingly  talented,  and 
after  her  separation  she  became  famous  as  a  sculptor,  ex- 
hibiting at  the  Salon  and  elsewhere  under  the  name  of 
Claude  Vingmy.  It  is  not  impossible  that  she  may  be 
still  alive ;  in  the  sense  of  her  artistic  genius,  at  least,  she 
is  something  more  than  a  memory. 

At  what  date  Alphonse  Louis  Constant  applied  himself 
to  the  study  of  the  occult  sciences  is  uncertain,  like  most 
other  epochs  of  his  life.  The  statement  on  page  142  of 
this  translation,  that  in  the  year  1825  he  entered  on  a 
fateful  path,  which  led  him  through  suffering  to  knowledge, 
must  not  be  understood  in  the  sense  that  his  initiation  took 
place  at  that  period,  which  was  indeed  early  in  boyhood. 
It  obviously  refers  to  his  enrolment  among  the  scholars  of 
Saint  Sulpice,  which,  in  a  sense,  led  to  suffering,  and  per- 
haps ultimately  to  science,  as  it  certainly  obtained  him 
education.  The  episode  of  the  New  Alliance — so  Gannean 
termed  his  system — connects  with  transcendentalism,  at  least 

and  obtaining  a  licence  to  preach  and  administer  the  sacraments  in  that 
diocese,  though  he  was  not  a  priest.  He  is  represented  as  drawing  large 
congregations  to  the  cathedral  by  his  preaching,  but  at  length  the  judge 
who  had  sentenced  him  unmasked  the  impostor,  and  the  sacrilegious  farce 
thus  terminated  dramatically. 

*  Including  Black  Magic  and  pacts  with  Lucifer,  according  to  the  silly 
calumnies  of  his  enemies. 


Viii  BIOGEAPHICAL  PREFACE 

on  the  side  of  hallucination,  and  may  have  furnished  the 
required  impulse  to  the  mind  of  the  disciple  ;  but  in  1846 
and  1847,  certain  pamphlets  issued  by  Constant  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Libraire  Societaire  and  the  Libraire  Phal- 
anste'rienne  shew  that  his  inclinations  were  still  towards 
Socialism,  tinctured  by  religious  aspirations.  The  period 
which  intervened  between  his  wife's  desertion*  and  the 
publication  of  the  Dogme  de  la  Haute  Magie,  in  1855,  was 
that,  probably,  which  he  devoted  less  or  more  to  occult 
study.  In  the  interim  he  issued  a  large  "  Dictionary  of 
Christian  Literature,"  which  is  still  extant  in  the  encyclo- 
paedic series  of  the  Abbe*  Migne ;  this  work  betrays  no 
leaning  towards  occult  science,  and,  indeed,  no  acquaintance 
therewith.  What  it  does  exhibit  unmistakably  is  the  in- 
tellectual insincerity  of  the  author,  for  he  assumes  therein 
the  mask  of  perfect  orthodoxy,  and  that  accent  in  matters  of 
religion  which  is  characteristic  of  the  voice  of  Rome.  The 
Dogme  de  la  Haute  Magie  was  succeeded  in  1856  by  its  com- 
panion volume  the  Hituel,  both  of  which  are  here  translated 
for  the  first  time  into  English.  It  was  followed  in  rapid 
succession  by  the  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  1860;  La  Clef  des 
Grands  Mysteres,  1861  ;  a  second  edition  of  the  Dogme  et 
Rituel,  to  which  a  long  and  irrelevant  introduction  was 
unfortunately  prefixed,  1862;  Fables  ct  Symloles,  1864; 
Le  Sorcier  de  Meudon,  a  beautiful  pastoral  idyll,  impressed 
with  the  cachet  cabalistique  ;  and  La  Science  des  Esprits,  1865. 
The  two  last  works  incorporate  the  substance  of  the 
amphlets  published  in  1846  and  1847. 

The  precarious  existence  of  Constant's  younger  days  was 
in  one  sense  but  faintly  improved  in  his  age.  His  books 
did  not  command  a  large  circulation,  but  they  secured  him 
admirers  and  pupils,  from  whom  he  received  remuneration 

*  I  must  not  be  understood  as  definitely  attaching  blame  to  Madame  Con- 
stant for  the  course  she  adopted.  Her  husband  was  approaching  middle  life 
when  he  withdrew  her— still  a  child— from  her  legal  protectors,  and  the 
runaway  marriage  which  began  by  forswearing  was,  under  the  circumstances, 
little  better  than  a  seduction  thinly  legalised,  and  it  was  afterwards  not  im- 
properly dissolved. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE  ix 

in  return  for  personal  or  written  courses  of  instruction.  He 
was  commonly  to  be  found  chez  lui  in  a  species  of  magical 
vestment,  which  may  be  pardoned  in  a  French  magus,  and 
his  only  available  portrait — prefixed  to  this  volume — 
represents  him  in  that  guise.  He  outlived  the  Franco- 
German  war,  and  as  he  had  exchanged  Socialism  for  a  sort 
of  transcendentalised  Imperialism,  his  political  faith  must 
have  been  as  much  tried  by  the  events  which  followed  the 
siege  of  Paris  as  was  his  patriotic  enthusiasm  by  the  reverses 
which  culminated  at  Se"dan.  His  contradictory  life  closed  in 
1875  amidst  the  last  offices  of  the  church  which  had  almost 
expelled  him  from  her  bosom.  He  left  many  manuscripts 
behind  him,  which  are  still  in  course  of  publication,  and 
innumerable  letters  to  his  pupils — Baron  Spedalieri  alone 
possesses  nine  volumes — have  been  happily  preserved  in 
most  cases,  and  are  in  some  respects  more  valuable  than 
the  formal  treatises. 

No  modern  expositor  of  occult  science  can  bear  any 
comparison  with  Sliphas  Levi,  and  among  ancient  exposi- 
tors, though  many  stand  higher  in  authority,  all  yield  to 
him  in  living  interest,  for  he  is  actually  the  spirit  of  modern 
thought  forcing  an  answer  for  the  times  from  the  old 
oracles.  Hence  there  are  greater  names,  but  there  is  no 
influence  so  great — no  fascination  in  occult  literature  ex- 
ceeds that  of  the  French  magus.  The  others  are  surrendered 
to  specialists  and  the  typical  serious  students  to  whom  all 
dull  and  unreadable  masterpieces  are  dedicated,  directly  or 
not ;  but  he  is  read  and  appreciated,  much  as  we  read  and 
appreciate  new  and  delightful  verse  which,  through  some 
conceit  of  the  poet,  is  put  into  the  vesture  of  Chaucer. 
Indeed,  the  writings  of  filiphas  Levi  stand,  as  regards  the 
grand  old  line  of  initiation,  in  relatively  the  same  position  as 
the  "  Earthly  Paradise  "  of  Mr  William  Morris  stands  to 
the  "  Canterbury  Tales."  There  is  the  recurrence  to  the 
old  conceptions,  and  there  is  the  assumption  of  the  old 
drapery,  but  there  is  in  each  case  the  new  spirit.  The 
"  incommunicable  axiom  "  and  the  "  great  arcanum,"  Azoth, 


X  BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE 

Inri,  and  Tetragrammaton,  which  are   the  vestures  of  the 
occult  philosopher,  are  like  the  "  cloth  of  Bruges  and  hogs- 
heads of  Guienne,  Florence  gold  cloth,  and  Ypres  napery  " 
of  the  poet.     In  both  cases  it  is  the  year  1850  ct  seq.,  in  a 
mask  of  high  fantasy.     Moreover,  "  the  idle  singer  of  an 
empty  day  "  is  paralleled  fairly  enough  by  "  the  poor  and 
obscure  scholar  who  has  recovered  the  lever  of  Archimedes." 
The  comparison  is  intentionally  grotesque,  but  it  obtains 
notwithstanding,  and  even  admits  of  development,   for  as 
Mr  Morris  in  a  sense  voided  the  raison  d'etre  of  his  poetry, 
and,  in  express  contradiction  to  his  own  mournful  question, 
has  endeavoured  to  "  set  the  crooked  straight  "  by  betaking 
himself  to  Socialism,  so  filiphas  LeVi  surrendered  the  rod 
of  miracles  and  voided  his  Doctrine  of  Magic  by  devising 
a  one-sided  and  insincere  concordat  with  orthodox  religion, 
and  expiring  in  the  arms  of  "  my   venerable   masters   in 
theology,"   the    descendants,  and  decadent  at  that,  of  the 
"  imbecile  theologians  of  the  middle  ages."     But  the  one  is, 
as  the  other  was,  a  man  of  sufficient   ability  to   make   a 
paradoxical  defence  of  a  position  which  remains  untenable. 
Students  of  ICliphas   LeVi  will  be  acquainted  with  the 
qualifications  and  stealthy  retractations  by  which  the  some- 
what uncompromising  position  of    initiated  superiority   in 
the  "  Doctrine  and  Eitual,"  had  its  real  significance  read 
out  of  it  by  the  later  works  of  the  magus.     I  have  dealt 
with  this  point  exhaustively  in  another  place,*  and  there  is 
no  call  to  pass  over  the  same  ground  a  second  time.     I 
propose  rather  to  indicate  as  briefly  as  possible  some  new 
considerations  which  will  help  us  to  understand  why  there 
were  grave  discrepancies  between  the  "  Doctrine  and  Ritual 
of  Transcendent  Magic"  and  the  volumes  which  followed 
these.     In  the  first  place,  the  earlier  books  were  written 
more  expressly  from  the  standpoint  of  initiation,  and  in  the 
language  thereof ;   they  obviously  contain    much   which  it 
would  be  mere  folly  to  construe  after  a  literal  fashion,  and 

*  See  the  Critical  Essay  prefixed  to  "  The  Mysteries  of  Magic  :  a  Digest  of 
the  Writings  of  Eliphas  Levi."    London  :  George  Redway.     1886. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE  XI 

what  filiphas  LeVi  wrote  at  a  later  period  is  not  so  much 
discrepant  with  his  earlier  instruction — though  it  is  this 
also — as  the  qualifications  placed  by  a  modern  transcen- 
dentalist  on  the  technical  exaggerations  of  the  secret  sciences. 
For  the  proof  we  need  travel  no  further  than  the  introduc- 
tion to  "  The  Doctrine  of  Magic,"  and  to  the  Hebrew  manu- 
script cited  therein,  as  to  the  powers  and  privileges  of  the 
magus.  Here  the  literal  interpretation  would  be  insanity ; 
these  claims  conceal  a  secret  meaning,  and  are  trickery  in 
their  verbal  sense.  They  are  what  filiphas  LeVi  himself 
terms  "hyperbolic,"  adding:  "If  the  sage  do  not  materially  and 
actually  perform  these  things,  he  accomplishes  others  which 
are  much  greater  and  more  admirable"  (p.  223).  But  this 
consideration  is  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  take  account  of  the 
issues  that  are  involved ;  it  will  not  explain,  for  example, 
why  filiphas  Levi,  who  consistently  teaches  in  the  "  Doctrine 
and  Ritual "  that  the  dogmas  of  so-called  revealed  religion 
are  nurse-tales  for  children,  should  subsequently  have  insisted 
on  their  acceptation  in  the  sense  of  the  orthodox  Church  by 
the  grown  men  of  science,  and  it  becomes  necessary  here  to 
touch  upon  a  matter  which,  by  its  nature,  and  obviously, 
does  not  admit  of  complete  elucidation. 

The  precise  period  of  study  which  produced  the  "  Doctrine 
and  Eitual  of  Transcendent  Magic"  as  its  first  literary 
result  is  not  indicated  with  any  certainty,  as  we  have  seen, 
in  the  life  of  the  author,  nor  do  I  regard  filiphas  LeVi  as 
constitutionally  capable  of  profound  or  extensive  book  study. 
Intensely  suggestive,  he  is  at  the  same  time  without  much 
evidence  of  depth ;  splendid  in  generalisation,  he  is  without 
accuracy  in  detail,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  cite  a  worse 
guide  over  mere  matters  of  fact.  His  "History  of  Magic"  is  a 
case  in  point ;  as  a  philosophical  survey  it  is  admirable,  and 
there  is  nothing  in  occult  literature  to  approach  it  for 
literary  excellence,  but  it  swarms  with  historical  inac- 
curacies ;  it  is  in  all  respects  an  accomplished  and  in  no 
way  an  erudite  performance,  nor  do  I  think  that  the  writer 
much  concerned  himself  with  any  real  reading  of  the 

b 


Xll  BIOGRAPHICAL   PREFACE 

authorities  whom  he  cites.  The  French  verb  parcourir 
represents  his  method  of  study,  and  not  the  verb  appro- 
fondir.  Let  us  take  one  typical  case.  There  is  no  occult 
writer  whom  he  cites  with  more  satisfaction,  and  towards 
whom  he  exhibits  more  reverence,  than  William  Postel,  and 
of  all  Postel's  books  there  is  none  which  he  mentions  so 
often  as  the  Clavis  Absconditorum  a  Constitutione  Mundi  ; 
yet  he  had  read  this  minute  treatise  so  carelessly  that  he 
missed  a  vital  point  concerning  it,  and  apparently  died 
unaware  that  the  symbolic  key  prefixed  to  it  was  the  work 
of  the  editor  and  not  the  work  of  Postel.  It  does  not 
therefore  seem  unreasonable  to  affirm  that  had  LeVi  been 
left  to  himself,  he  would  not  have  got  far  in  occult  science, 
because  his  Gallic  vivacity  would  have  been  blunted  too 
quickly  by  the  horrors  of  mere  research ;  but  he  did  some- 
how fall  within  a  circle  of  initiation  which  curtailed  the 
necessity  for  such  research,  and  put  him  in  the  right  path, 
making  visits  to  the  Bibliotheque  Rationale  and  the  Arsenal 
of  only  subsidiary  importance.  This,  therefore,  constitutes 
the  importance  of  the  "  Doctrine  and  Eitual " ;  disguised 
indubitably,  it  is  still  the  voice  of  initiation ;  of  what  school 
does  not  matter,  for  in  this  connection  nothing  can  be 
spoken  plainly,  and  I  can  ask  only  the  lenience  of  deferred 
judgment  from  my  readers  for  my  honourable  assurance 
that  I  am  not  speaking  idly.  The  grades  of  that  initiation 
had  been  only  partly  ascended  by  filiphas  Levi  when  he 
published  the  "  Doctrine  and  Ritual,"  and  its  publication 
closed  the  path  of  his  progress  :  as  he  was  expelled  by  Saint 
Sulpice  for  the  exercise  of  private  judgment  in  matters  of 
doctrinal  belief,  so  he  was  expelled  by  his  occult  chiefs  for 
the  undue  exercise  of  personal  discretion  in  the  matter 
of  the  revelation  of  the  mysteries.  Now,  these  facts  explain 
in  the  first  place  the  importance,  as  I  have  said,  of  the 
"  Doctrine  and  Eitual,"  because  it  represents  a  knowledge 
which  cannot  be  derived  from  books  ;  they  explain,  secondly, 
the  shortcomings  of  that  work,  because  it  is  not  the  result 
of  a  full  knowledge ;  why,  thirdly,  the  later  writings  contain 


BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE  xiii 

no  evidences  of  further  knowledge ;  and,  lastly,  I  think  that 
they  materially  assist  us  to  understand  why  there  are  retracta- 
tions, qualifications,  and  subterfuges  in  the  said  later  works. 
Having  gone  too  far,  he  naturally  attempted  to  go  back,  and 
just  as  he  strove  to  patch  up  a  species  of  modus  vivendi  with 
the  church  of  his  childhood,  so  he  endeavoured,  by  throw- 
ing dust  in  the  eyes  of  his  readers,  to  make  his  peace  with 
that  initiation,  the  first  law  of  which  he  had  indubitably 
violated.  In  both  cases,  and  quite  naturally,  he  failed. 

It  remains  for  me  to  state  what  I  feel  personally  to  be 
the  chief  limitation  of  LeVi,  namely,  that  he  was  a  tran- 
scendentalist  but  not  a  mystic,  and,  indeed,  he  was  scarcely 
a  transcendentalist  in  the  accepted  sense,  for  he  was 
fundamentally  a  materialist — a  materialist,  moreover,  who 
at  times  approached  perilously  towards  atheism,  as  when  he 
states  that  God  is  a  hypothesis  which  is  "very  probably 
necessary " ;  he  was,  moreover,  a  disbeliever  in  any  real 
communication  with  the  world  of  spirits.  He  defines 
mysticism  as  the  shadow  and  the  buffer  of  intellectual 
light,  and  loses  no  opportunity  to  enlarge  upon  its  false 
illuminism,  its  excesses,  and  fatuities.  There  is,  therefore, 
no  way  from  man  to  God  in  his  system,  while  the  sole 
avenues  of  influx  from  God  to  man  are  sacramentally,  and 
in  virtue  merely  of  a  tolerable  hypothesis.  Thus  man  must 
remain  in  simple  intellectualism  if  he  would  rest  in  reason ; 
the  sphere  of  material  experience  is  that  of  his  knowledge ; 
and  as  to  all  beyond  it,  there  are  only  the  presumptions  of 
analogy.  I  submit  that  this  is  not  the  doctrine  of  occult 
science,  nor  the  summum  "bonum  of  the  greater  initiation ; 
that  transcendental  pneumatology  is  more  by  its  own; 
hypothesis  than  an  alphabetical  system  argued  kabbalis- 
tically ;  and  that  more  than  mere  memories  can  on  the  same 
assumption  be  evoked  in  the  astral  light.  The  hierarchic 
order  of  the  visible  world  has  its  complement  in  the  invisible 
hierarchy,  which  analogy  leads  us  to  discern,  being  at  the 
same  time  a  process  of  our  perception  rather  than  a  rigid 
law  governing  the  modes  of  manifestation  in  all  things  seen 


XIV  BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE 

and  unseen ;  initiation  takes  us  to  the  bottom  step  of  the 
ladder  of  the  invisible  hierarchy  and  instructs  us  in  the 
principles  of  ascent,  but  the  ascent  rests  personally  with 
ourselves;  the  voices  of  some  who  have  preceded  can  be 
heard  above  us,  but  they  are  of  those  who  are  still  upon  the 
way,  and  they  die  as  they  rise  into  the  silence,  towards  which 
we  also  must  ascend  alone,  where  initiation  can  no  longer 
help  us,  unto  that  bourne  from  whence  no  traveller  returns, 
and  the  influxes  are  sacramental  only  to  those  who  are  below. 
An  annotated  translation  exceeded  the  scope  of  the  present 
undertaking,  but  there  is  much  in  the  text  which  follows 
that  offers  scope  for  detailed  criticism,  and  there  are  points 
also  where  further  elucidation  would  be  useful.  One  of  the 
most  obvious  defects,  the  result  of  mere  carelessness  or  undue 
haste  in  writing,  is  the  promise  to  explain  or  to  prove  given 
points  later  on,  which  are  forgotten  subsequently  by  the 
author.  Instances  will  be  found  on  p.  65,  concerning  the 
method  of  determining  the  appearance  of  unborn  children  by 
means  of  the  pentagram ;  on  p.  83,  concerning  the  rules 
for  the  recognition  of  sex  in  the  astral  body;  on  p.  9*7, 
concerning  the  notary  art ;  on  p.  100,  concerning  the  magical 
side  of  the  Exercises  of  St  Ignatius;  on  p.  123,  concerning 
the  alleged  sorcery  of  Grandier  and  Girard ;  on  p.  125,  con- 
cerning Schroepffer's  secrets  and  formulas  for  evocation ;  on 
p.  134,  concerning  the  occult  iconography  of  Gaffarel.  In 
some  cases  the  promised  elucidations  appear  in  other  places 
than  those  indicated,  but  they  are  mostly  wanting  altogether. 
There  are  other  perplexities  with  which  the  reader  must  deal 
according  to  his  judgment.  The  explanation  of  the  quad- 
rature of  the  circle  on  p.  37  is  a  childish  folly ;  the  illus- 
tration of  perpetual  motion  on  p.  55  involves  a  mechanical 
absurdity  ;  the  doctrine  of  the  perpetuation  of  the  same 
physiognomies  from  generation  to  generation  is  not  less 
absurd  in  heredity  ;  the  cause  assigned  to  cholera  and  other 
ravaging  epidemics,  more  especially  the  reference  to  bacteria, 
seems  equally  outrageous  in  physics.  There  is  one  other 
matter  to  which  attention  should  be  directed ;  the  Hebrew 


BIOGRAPHICAL    PREFACE  XV 

quotations  in  the  original  —  and  the  observation  applies 
generally  to  all  the  works  of  Le'vi — swarm  with  typo- 
graphical and  other  errors,  some  of  which  it  is  impossible  to 
correct,  as,  for  example,  the  passage  cited  from  Eabbi 
Abraham  on  p.  266.  So  also  the  Greek  conjuration,  pp.  277 
and  278,  is  simply  untranslatable  as  it  stands,  and  the 
version  given  is  not  only  highly  conjectural,  but  omits  an 
entire  passage  owing  to  insuperable  difficulties.  Lastly,  after 
careful  consideration,  I  have  judged  it  the  wiser  course  to 
leave  out  the  preliminary  essay  which  was  prefixed  to  the 
second  edition  of  the  "  Doctrine  and  Ritual " ;  its  prophetic 
utterances  upon  the  mission  of  Napoleon  III.  have  been 
stultified  by  subsequent  events ;  it  is  devoid  of  any  con- 
nection with  the  work  which  it  precedes,  and,  representing 
as  it  does  the  later  views  of  Levi,  it  would  be  a  source  of 
confusion  to  the  reader.  The  present  translation  represents, 
therefore,  the  first  edition  of  the  Dogme  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute 
Magie,  omitting  nothing  but  a  few  unimportant  citations 
from  old  French  grimoires  in  an  unnecessary  appendix  at 
the  end.  The  portrait  of  Le'vi  is  from  a  carte-de-visite  in 
the  possession  of  Mr  Edward  Maitland,  and  was  issued 
with  his  "  Life  of  Anna  Kingsford,"  a  few  months  ago. 

LONDON,  September  1896. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PACK 

BIOGRAPHICAL  PREFACE         ......  v 

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FIGURES  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  WORK  .        xxi 


THE   DOCTEINE    OF   TEANSCENDENT   MAGIC 

INTRODUCTION  ........         3 

CHAPTER  I.  THE  CANDIDATE.    Unity  of  the  Doctrine— Qualifications 

necessary  for  the  Adept       ......        27 

CHAPTER  II.  THE  PILLARS  OF  THE  TEMPLE.  Foundations  of  the  Doc- 
trine— The  Two  Principles — Agent  and  Patient  .  .  .37 

CHAPTER  III.    THE  TRIANGLE  OF  SOLOMON.    Universal  Theology  of 

the  Triad— The  Macrocosm  .....         44 

CHAPTER  IV.  THE  TETRAGRAM.  Magical  Virtue  of  the  Tetrad- 
Analogies  and  Adaptations — Elementary  Spirits  of  the  Kabbalah .  51 

CHAPTER  V.  THE  PENTAGRAM.    The  Microcosm  and  the  sign  thereof 

— Power  over  Elements  and  Spirits  .  .  .  .60 

CHAPTER  VI.  MAGICAL  EQUILIBRIUM.    Action  of  the  Will — Impulse 

and  Resistance — Sexual  love — The  Plenum  and  the  Void  .  .         67 

CHAPTER  VII.  THE  FIERY  SWORD.  The  Sanctum  Regnum — The 
seven  Angels  and  seven  Genii  of  the  Planets— Universal  Virtue  of 
the  Septenary  .......  75 

CHAPTER  VIII.  REALISATION.    Analogical  reproduction  of  Forces — 

Incarnation  of  Ideas — Parallelism — Necessary  Antagonism  .         79 

CHAPTER  IX.  INITIATION.  The  Magical  Lamp,  Mantle,  and  Staff — 
Prophecy  and  Intuition — Security  and  stability  of  the  Initiate  in 
the  midst  of  dangers — Exercise  of  Magical  Power  .  .  .86 

CHAPTER  X.  THE  KABBALAH.  The  Sephiroth— The  Semhamphoras— 
The  Paths  and  Gates— Bereschith  and  Mercavah— Gematria  and 
Temurah  ........  89 

xvii 


XV1U  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAQB 

CHAPTER  XI.  THE  MAGIC  CHAIN.     Magnetic  Currents— Secrets  of 

great  successes — Talking  Tables — Fluidic  Manifestations  .  .         97 

CHAPTER  XII.  THE  GREAT  WORK.  Hermetic  Magic — Doctrines  of 
Hermes — The  Minerva  of  the  World — The  grand  and  unique 
Athanor— The  Hanged  Man  .  .  .  .  .106 

CHAPTER  XIII.  NECROMANCY.  Revelations  from  the  other  World- 
Secrets  of  Death  and  of  Life— Evocations  .  .  .  .111 

CHAPTER  XIV.  TRANSMUTATIONS.  Lycanthropy— Mutual  posses- 
sions, or  embryonic  state  of  souls— The  Wand  of  Circe— The  Elixir 
ofCagliostro  ...  .  .  .  .  .120 

CHAPTER  XV.  BLACK  MAGIC.     Demonomania  —  Obsessions—  Urban 

Grandier— Girard— The  work  of  M.  Eudes  de  Mirville        .  .       126 

^CHAPTER  XVI.  BEWITCHMENTS.     Dangerous  forces — Power  of  life  and 

death— Facts  and  Principles— Remedies— Practice  of  Paracelsus    .       128 

CHAPTER  XVII.  ASTROLOGY.  Knowledge  of  Men  by  the  Signs  of  their 
Nativity — Phrenology — Chiromancy — Metoposcopy—  Planets  and 
Stars — Climacteric  years — Predictions  by  means  of  Astral  Revolu- 
tions ........  137 

CHAPTER  XVIII.  CHARMS  AND  PHILTRES.  Venomous  Magic — 
Powders  and  Pacts  of  Sorcerers— The  Jettatura  at  Naples— The 
Evil  Eye— Superstitions— Talismans  .  .  .  .144 

CHAPTER  XIX.  THE  STONE  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHERS  —  ELAGABALUS. 

What  this  Stone  is — Why  it  is  a  Stone — Singular  Analogies         .       152 

CHAPTER  XX.  THE  UNIVERSAL  MEDICINE.    Extension  of  Life  by 

means  of  Potable  Gold— Resurrection— Abolition  of  Pain  .  .157 

CHAPTER  XXI.  DIVINATION.  Dreams  —  Somnambulism  —  Presenti- 
ments— Second  Sight — Divinatory  Instruments — Alliette  and  his 
discoveries  concerning  the  Tarot  .  .  ,  .  .160 

CHAPTER  XXII.  SUMMARY  AND  GENERAL  KEY  OF  THE  FOUR  SECRET 
SCIENCES.  The  Kabbalah  —  Magic  —  Alchemy  —  Magnetism  or 
Occult  Medicine  .  .  165 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  XIX 


THE   EITUAL    OF    TRANSCENDENT    MAGIC. 

PAOK 

INTRODUCTION    ........      175 

CHAPTER  I.  PREPARATIONS.    Dispositions  and  Principles  of  Magical 

Operation— Personal  Preparations  of  the  Operator  .  .       191 

CHAPTER  II.  MAGICAL  EQUILIBRIUM.  Alternative  use  of  Forces- 
Oppositions  necessary  in  the  Practice — Simultaneous  attack  and 
resistance— The  Sword  and  Trowel  of  the  Builders  of  the  Temple .  200 

CHAPTER  III.  THE  TRIANGLE  OF  PANTACLES.  Use  of  the  Triad  in 
Conjurations  and  Magical  Sacrifices — Triangle  of  evocations  and 
Pantacles — Triangular  Combinations — The  Magical  Trident  of 
Paracelsus  ........  206 

CHAPTER  IV.  THE  CONJURATION  OF  THE  FOUR.  Occult  Elements 
and  their  Use — Manner  of  overcoming  and  subjecting  Elementary 
Spirits  and  Maleficent  Genii  .  .  .  .  .214 

CHAPTER  V.  THE  BLAZING  PENTAGRAM.    Use  and  Consecration  of  the 

Pentagram  ........      224 

CHAPTER  VI.  THE  MEDIUM  AND  MEDIATOR.  Application  of  Will  to 
the  Great  Agent — The  Natural  Medium  and  the  Extra-natural 
Mediator  ........  229 

CHAPTER  VII.  THE  SEPTENARY  OF  TALISMANS.  Ceremonies,  Vest- 
ments, and  Perfumes  proper  to  the  seven  days  of  the  week— Com- 
position of  the  Seven  Talismans  and  Consecration  of  Magical  In- 
struments ........  234 

CHAPTER  VIII.  A  WARNING  TO  THE  IMPRUDENT.  Precautions  neces- 
sary for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Great  Works  of  Science  .  248 

CHAPTER  IX.  THE  CEREMONIAL  OF  INITIATES.     Its  end  and  intention     251 

CHAPTER  X.  THE  KEY  OF  OCCULTISM.  Use  of  Pantacles— Their 
ancient  and  modern  mysteries— Key  of  Biblical  obscurities— Ezekiel 
and  St  John  .......  256 

CHAPTER  XL  THE  TRIPLE  CHAIN.    Methods  of  its  formation  .      260 

CHAPTER  XII.  THE  GREAT  WORK.  Its  Processes  and  Secrets— Ray- 
mond Lully  and  Nicholas  Flamel  .  .  .  .  .264 

CHAPTER  XIII.    NECROMANCY.    Ceremonial  for  the  Resurrection  of 

the  Dead  and  for  Necromancy         .....      270 

CHAPTER  XIV.  TRANSMUTATIONS.  Methods  for  changing  the  nature 
of  things— The  Ring  of  Gyges— Words  which  accomplish  Trans- 
mutations .  .  281 


XX  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAQK 

CHAPTER  XV.  THE  SABBATH  OF  THE  SORCERERS.  Rites  and  special 
evocations  of  the  Sabbath — The  Goat  of  Mendes  and  its  worship 
— Aberrations  of  Catherine  de  Medecis  and  Gilles  de  Laval,  Lord  of 
Retz 288 

CHAPTER  XVI.  WITCHCRAFT  AND  SPELLS.    Ceremonial  for  the  same 

— Mode  of  defence  against  them      .....       306 

CHAPTER  XVII.  THE  WRITING  OF  THE  STARS.  Divination  by  Stars 
— Planisphere  of  Gaffarel — How  the  Destinies  of  Men  and  Empires 
may  be  read  in  Heaven  ......  313 

CHAPTER  XVIII.  PHILTRES  AND  MAGNETISM.   Composition  of  Philtres 

— How  to  influence  Destinies — Remedies  and  Preventives .  .      326 

CHAPTER  XIX.  THE  MASTERY  OF  THE  SUN.    Use  of  the  Philosophical 

Stone — How  it  must  be  preserved,  disintegrated,  and  recomposed      335 

CHAPTER  XX.  THE  THAUMATURGE.  Therapeutics — Warm  and  cold 
Insufflations — Passes  with  and  without  contact — Imposition  of 
hands — Diverse  virtues  of  saliva — Oil  and  Wine — Incubation  and 
Massage  ........  339 

CHAPTER  XXI.  THE  SCIENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS.  Ceremonial  for 
Divinatory  Operations — The  Clavicle  of  Trithemius — Probable 
future  of  Europe  and  of  the  world  .....  346 

CHAPTER  XXII.  THE  BOOK  OF  HERMES.  After  what  manner  all 
science  is  contained  in  the  occult  work  of  Hermes — Antiquity  of 
this  book— Labours  of  Court  de  Gebelin  and  of  Etteilla— The 
Theraphim  of  the  Hebrews  according  to  GafFarel — The  Key  of 
William  Postel— A  book  of  Saint  Martin— The  true  shape  of  the 
Ark  of  the  Covenant  —  Italian  and  German  Tarots  —  Chinese 
Tarots — A  German  Medal  of  the  sixteenth  century — Universal 
Key  of  the  Tarot — Its  application  to  the  Symbols  of  the  Apocalypse 
— The  seven  seals  of  the  Christian  Kabbalah— Conclusion  of  the 
entire  work  .  355 


SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  RITUAL. 

THE  NUCTEMERON  OF  APOLLONIUS  OF  TYANA  ....      387 
THE  NUCTEMERON  ACCORDING  TO  THE  HEBREWS          .  .  .395 

INDEX  .  401 


EXPLANATION    OF    THE    FIGUEES     CONTAINED 
IN   THIS   WORK. 

MM 

FIGURE  I.  The  Great  Symbol  of  Solomon .  .  .  .  .2 

The  Double  Triangle  of  Solomon,  represented  by  the  two  Ancients 
of  the  Kabbalah  ;  the  Macroprosopus  and  the  Microprosopus ;  the 
God  of  Light  and  the  God  of  Reflections ;  mercy  and  vengeance  ; 
the  white  Jehovah  and  the  black  Jehovah. 

FIGURE  II.  Sacerdotal  Esotericism  making  the  sign  of  Excommunication    26 

A  sacerdotal  hand  making  the  sign  of  esotericism  and  projecting 
the  figure  of  the  demon  in  its  shadow.  Above  are  the  Ace  of 
Deniers,  as  found  in  the  Chinese  Tarot,  and  two  superposed  triangles, 
one  white  and  one  black.  It  is  a  new  allegory  explaining  the  same 
mysteries  ;  it  is  the  origin  of  good  and  evil  ;  it  is  the  creation  of  the 
demon  by  mystery. 

FIGURE  III.  The  Triangle  of  Solomon       .  .  .  .  .40 

FIGURE  IV.  The  Four  Great  Kabbalistic  Names  .  .  .  .54 

FIGURE  V.  The  Pentagram  of  Faust          .  .  .  .  .60 

FIGURE  VI.  The  Tetragram  of  the  Zohar  .  .  .  .  .91 

FIGURE  VII.  Addha-Nari,  grand  Indian  Pantacle  .  .  .151 

This  pantheistic  image  represents  Religion  or  Truth,  terrible  for 
the  profane  and  gentle  for  initiates.  It  has  more  than  one  analogy 
with  the  Cherub  of  Ezekiel.  The  human  figure  is  placed  between 
a  bridled  bull  and  a  tiger,  thus  forming  the  triangle  of  Kether, 
Geburah,  and  Gedulah,  or  Chesed.  In  the  Indian  symbol,  the  four 
magical  signs  of  the  Tarot  are  found  in  the  four  hands  of  Addha- 
Nari — on  the  side  of  the  initiate  and  of  mercy  are  the  sceptre  and 
the  cup  ;  on  the  side  of  the  profane,  represented  by  the  tiger,  are  the 
sword  and  the  circle,  which  latter  may  become  either  the  ring  of  a 
chain  or  an  iron  collar.  On  the  side  of  the  initiate,  the  goddess  is 
clothed  only  with  the  skin  of  the  tiger  ;  on  that  of  the  tiger  itself 
she  wears  a  long  star-spangled  robe,  and  even  her  hair  is  veiled.  A 
fountain  of  milk  springs  from  her  forehead,  falls  on  the  side  of  the 
initiate,  and  about  Addha-Nari  and  the  two  animals  it  forms  a  magic 
circle,  enclosing  them  in  an  island  which  represents  the  world.  The 
goddess  wears  round  her  neck  a  magic  chain,  formed  of  iron  links 
on  the  side  of  the  profane  and  of  intelligent  heads  on  that  of  the 
initiate  ;  she  bears  on  her  forehead  the  figure  of  the  lingam,  and  on 
either  side  of  her  are  three  superposed  lines  which  represent  the 
equilibrium  of  the  triad,  and  recall  the  trigrams  of  Fo-Hi. 

xxi 


XX11  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FIGUKES 

PAGE 

FIGURE  VIII.  The  Pantacles  of  Ezekiel  and  Pythagoras  .  .  .166 

The  four-headed  Cherubim  of  Ezekiel's  prophecy,  explained  by  the 
double  triangle  of  Solomon.  Below  is  the  wheel  of  Ezekiel,  key  of 
all  pantacles,  and  the  pantacle  of  Pythagoras.  The  cherub  of 
Ezekiel  is  here  represented  as  it  is  described  by  the  prophet.  Its 
four  heads  are  the  tetrad  of  Mercavah  ;  its  six  wings  are  the  senary 
of  Bereschith.  The  human  figure  in  the  middle  represents  reason  ; 
the  eagle's  head  is  faith  ;  the  bull  is  resignation  and  toil ;  the  lion  is 
warfare  and  conquest.  This  symbol  is  analogous  to  that  of  the 
Egyptian  sphinx,  but  is  more  appropriate  to  the  Kabbalah  of  the 
Hebrews. 

FIGUEE  IX.  The  Sabbatic  Goat.     The  Baphomet  of  Mendes        .  .  174 

A  pantheistic  and  magical  figure  of  the  Absolute.  The  torch 
placed  between  the  two  horns  represents  the  equilibrating  intelli- 
gence of  the  triad.  The  goat's  head,  which  is  synthetic,  and  unites 
some  characteristics  of  the  dog,  bull,  and  ass,  represents  the  exclusive 
responsibility  of  matter  and  the  expiation  of  bodily  sins  in  the 
body.  The  hands  are  human,  to  exhibit  the  sanctity  of  labour  ;  they 
make  the  sign  of  esotericism  above  and  below,  to  impress  mystery  on 
initiates,  and  they  point  at  two  lunar  crescents,  the  upper  being  white 
and  the  lower  black,  to  explain  the  correspondences  of  good  and  evil, 
mercy  and  justice.  The  lower  part  of  the  body  is  veiled,  portraying 
the  mysteries  of  universal  generation,  which  is  expressed  solely  by 
the  symbol  of  the  caduceus.  The  belly  of  the  goat  is  scaled,  and 
should  be  coloured  green  ;  the  semi-circle  above  should  be  blue  ;  the 
plumage,  reaching  to  the  breast,  should  be  of  various  hues.  The 
goat  has  female  breasts,  and  thus  its  only  human  characteristics  are 
those  of  maternity  and  toil,  otherwise  the  signs  of  redemption.  On 
its  forehead,  between  the  horns  and  beneath  the  torch,  is  the  sign 
of  the  microcosm,  or  the  pentagram  with  one  beam  in  the  ascendant, 
symbol  of  human  intelligence,  which,  placed  thus  below  the  torch, 
makes  the  flame  of  the  latter  an  image  of  divine  revelation.  This 
Pantheos  should  be  seated  on  a  cube,  and  its  footstool  should  be  a 
single  ball,  or  a  ball  and  a  triangular  stool.  In  our  design  we  have 
given  the  former  only  to  avoid  complicating  the  figure. 

FIGURE  X.  The  Triangle  of  Solomon         .  .  .  .  .189 

FIGURE  XL  The  Trident  of  Paracelsus     .  .  .  .  .212 

This  trident,  symbol  of  the  triad,  is  formed  of  three  pyramidal 
teeth  superposed  on  a  Greek  or  Latin  tau.  On  one  of  its  teeth  is  a 
jod,  which  on  one  side  pierces  a  crescent,  and  on  the  other  a  trans- 
verse line,  a  figure  which  recalls  hieroglyphically  the  zodiacal  sign  of 
the  Crab.  On  the  opposite  tooth  is  a  composite  sign  recalling  that 
•of  the  Twins  and  that  of  the  Lion.  Between  the  claws  of  the  Crab  is 
the  sun,  and  the  astronomical  cross  is  seen  in  proximity  to  the  lion. 
On  the  middle  tooth  there  is  hieroglyphically  depicted  the  figure  of  the 
celestial  serpent,  with  the  sign  of  Jupiter  for  its  head.  By  the  side 
of  the  Crab  is  the  word  OBITO,  or  Begone,  Retire  ;  and  by  the  side 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FIGURES  XX111 

PAQK 

of  the  Lion  is  the  word  IMO,  Although,  Persist.  In  the  centre,  and 
near  the  symbolical  serpent  there  is  AP  Do  SKL,  a  word  composed  of 
an  abbreviation,  of  a  word  written  kabbalistically  and  in  the  Hebrew 
fashion,  and,  finally,  of  a  complete  ordinary  word  ;  AP,  which  should 
be  read  An,  because  these  are  the  first  two  letters  of  the  Greek 
ARCHEUS  ;  Do,  which  should  be  read  OD  ;  and,  lastly,  SEL,  Salt. 
These  are  the  three  prime  substances,  and  the  occult  names  of 
Archeus  and  Od  have  the  same  significance  as  the  Sulphur  and 
Mercury  of  the  Philosophers.  On  the  iron  stem  which  serves  as  a 
haft  for  the  trident  there  is  the  triplicated  letter  P.  P.  P.,  a  phallic 
and  lingamic  hieroglyph,  with  the  words  VLI  Dox  FATO,  which 
must  be  read  by  taking  the  first  letter  for  the  number  of  the  Penta- 
gram in  Roman  figures,  thus  completing  the  phrase  PENTAGRAM- 
MATICA  LIBERTATE  Dox  FATO,  equivalent  to  the  three  letters  of 
Cagliostro — L.  P.  D. — Liberty,  Power,  Duty.  On  the  one  side, 
absolute  liberty  ;  on  the  other,  necessity  or  invincible  fatality ;  in 
the  centre,  REASON,  the  Kabbalistic  Absolute,  which  constitutes 
universal  equilibrium.  This  admirable  magical  summary  of  Para- 
celsus will  serve  as  a  key  to  the  obscure  works  of  the  Kabbalist 
Wronski,  a  remarkable  man  of  learning  who  more  than  once  allowed 
himself  to  be  carried  away  from  his  ABSOLUTE  REASON  by  the 
mysticism  of  his  nation,  and  by  pecuniary  speculations  unworthy  of 
so  distinguished  a  thinker.  We  allow  him  at  the  same  time  the 
honour  and  the  glory  of  having  discovered  before  us  the  secret  of  the 
Trident  of  Paracelsus.  Thus,  Paracelsus  represents  the  Passive 
by  the  Crab,  the  Active  by  the  Lion,  Intelligence  or  equilibrating 
Reason  by  Jupiter  or  the  Man-King  ruling  the  serpent ;  then  he 
balances  forces  by  giving  the  Passive  the  fecundation  of  the  Active 
represented  by  the  Sun,  and  to  the  Active  space  and  might  to  conquer 
and  enlighten  under  the  symbol  of  the  Cross.  He  says  to  the  Passive : 
Obey  the  impulse  of  the  Active  and  advance  with  it  by  the  very 
equilibrium  of  resistance.  To  the  Active  he  says :  Resist  the  im- 
mobility of  obstacle  ;  persist  and  advance.  Then  he  explains  these 
alternated  forces  by  the  great  central  triad — LIBERTY,  NECESSITY, 
REASON, — REASON  in  the  centre,  LIBERTY  and  NECESSITY  in  counter- 
poise. There  is  the  power  of  the  Trident,  there  its  haft  and  founda- 
tion ;  it  is  the  universal  law  of  nature  ;  it  is  the  very  essence  of  the 
Word,  realised  and  demonstrated  by  the  triad  of  human  life — the 
Archeus,  or  mind  ;  the  Od,  or  plastic  mediator ;  and  the  Salt  Di- 
visible matter.  We  have  given  separately  the  explanation  of  this 
figure  because  it  is  of  the  highest  importance,  and  gives  the  measure 
of  the  greatest  genius  of  the  occult  sciences.  After  this  interpreta- 
tion, it  will  be  understood  why,  in  the  course  of  our  work,  we 
invariably  bow  with  the  traditional  veneration  of  true  adepts  before 
the  divine  Paracelsus. 

FIGURE  XIII.  The  Pentagram       .  .  .  .  .  .228 

FIGURE  XIV.  Magical  Instruments— the  Lamp,  Rod,  Sword,  and  Dagger  244 


XXIV  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FIGURES 

FAUK 

FIGURE  XV.  The  Key  of  Thoth    .  *  .  .  .  .281 

FIGURE  XVI.  Goetic  Circle  of  Black  Evocations  and  Pacts          .  .  299 

FIGURES  XVII.  and  XVIII.  Divers  infernal  characters  taken  from  Agrippa, 
Peter  of  Apono,  a  number  of  Grimoires,  and  the  documents  of  the 
trial  of  Urban  Grandier  .....  301,  302 

FIGURE  XIX.  Kabbalistic  signs  of  Orion  .  .  .  .  .316 

FIGURE  XX.  Infernal  Characters  of  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac        .  318 

FIGURE  XXI.  Magic  Squares  of  the  Planetary  Genii  according  to 
Paracelsus  .......  361,  362 

FIGURE  XXII.  Chariot  of  Hermes,  seventh  Key  of  the  Tarot      .  .  365 

FIGURE  XXIII.  The  Ark  of  the  Covenant  .  .  .  .371 

FIGURE  XXIV.  Apocalyptic  Key— The  Seven  Seals  of  St  John   .  .  376 


THE  DOCTEINE  OF  TRANSCENDENT   MAGIC 


INTRODUCTION 

BEHIND  the  veil  of  all  the  hieratic  and  mystical  allegories 
of  ancient  doctrines,  behind  the  shadows  and  the  strange 
ordeals  of  all  initiations,  under  the  seal  of  all  sacred 
writings,  in  the  ruins  of  Nineveh  or  Thebes,  on  the  crum- 
bling stones  of  the  old  temples,  and  on  the  blackened  visage 
of  the  Assyrian  or  Egyptian  sphinx,  in  the  monstrous  or 
marvellous  paintings  which  interpret  to  the  faithful  of 
India  the  inspired  pages  of  the  Vedas,  in  the  strange 
emblems  of  our  old  books  of  alchemy,  in  the  ceremonies 
at  reception  practised  by  all  mysterious  societies,  traces 
are  found  of  a  doctrine  which  is  everywhere  the  same,  and 
everywhere  carefully  concealed.  Occult  philosophy  seems 
to  have  been  the  nurse  or  god-mother  of  all  intellectual 
forces,  the  key  of  all  divine  obscurities,  and  the  absolute 
queen  of  society  in  those  ages  when  it  was  reserved  ex- 
clusively for  the  education  of  priests  and  of  kings.  It 
reigned  in  Persia  with  the  magi,  who  at  length  perished,  as 
perish  all  masters  of  the  world,  because  they  abused  their 
power;  it  endowed  India  with  the  most  wonderful  tradi- 
tions, and  with  an  incredible  wealth  of  poesy,  grace,  and 
terror  in  its  emblems  ;  it  civilised  Greece  to  the  music  of 
the  lyre  of  Orpheus ;  it  concealed  the  principles  of  all  the 
sciences  and  of  all  human  intellectual  progress  in  the  bold 
calculations  of  Pythagoras ;  fable  abounded  in  its  miracles, 
and  history,  attempting  to  appreciate  this  unknown  power, 
became  confused  with  fable ;  it  shook  or  strengthened 
empires  by  its  oracles,  caused  tyrants  to  tremble  on  their 
thrones,  and  governed  all  minds,  either  by  curiosity  or  by 
fear.  For  this  science,  said  the  crowd,  there  is  nothing 
impossible ;  it  commands  the  elements,  knows  the  language 
of  the  stars,  and  directs  the  planetary  courses;  when  it 


4         THE  DOCTRINE  OF  TRANSCENDENT  MAGIC 

speaks,  the  moon  falls  blood-red  from  heaven ;  the  dead  rise 
in  their  graves  and  articulate  ominous  words  as  the  night 
wind  blows  through  their  skulls.  Mistress  of  love  or  of 
hate,  the  science  can  dispense  paradise  or  hell  at  its 
pleasure  to  human  hearts ;  it  disposes  of  all  forms,  and 
distributes  beauty  or  ugliness ;  with  the  rod  of  Circe  it 
alternately  changes  men  into  brutes  and  animals  into  men ; 
it  even  disposes  of  life  or  death,  and  can  confer  wealth  on 
its  adepts  by  the  transmutation  of  metals  and  immortality 
by  its  quintessence  or  elixir  compounded  of  gold  and  light. 
Such  was  magic  from  Zoroaster  to  Manes,  from  Orpheus  to 
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  when  positive  Christianity,  at  length 
victorious  over  the  brilliant  dreams