# Occult Science in India
Author: Louis Jacolliot
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #5775
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:19:34.388646
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




PROBLEMS OF CONDUCT

AN INTRODUCTORY SURVEY OF ETHICS

BY

DURANT DRAKE

A.M. (Harvard) Ph.D. (Columbia)

Associate Professor of Ethics and Philosophy of Religion at Wesleyan
University

BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO

1914




TO THE DEAR TWO WHOSE INTEREST IN PROBLEMS OF CONDUCT FIRST AWAKENED
MINE AND WHOSE EAGERNESS TO KNOW AND DO REMAINS UNDIMMED BY THE
YEARS MY FATHER AND MY MOTHER





PREFACE

This book represents in substance a course of lectures and discussions
given first at the University of Illinois and later at Wesleyan
University. It was written to meet the needs both of the college
student who has the added guidance of an instructor, and of the
generalreader who has no such assistance. The attempt has been
made to keep the presentation simple and clear enough to need no
interpreter, and by the list of readings appended to each chapter,
to make a self directed further study of any point easy and alluring.
These references are for the most part to books in English, easily
accessible, and both intelligible and interesting to the ordinary
untrained reader or undergraduate. Some articles from the popular
reviews have been included, which, if not always authoritative,
are interesting and suggestive.

The function of the instructor who should use this as a textbook would
consist, first, in making sure that the text was thoroughly read and
understood; secondly, in raising doubts, suggesting opposing views,
conducting a discussion with the object of making the student think
for himself; and, thirdly, in adding new material and illustration
and directing the outside readings which should supplement this
purposely brief and summary treatment. The books to which reference
is made in the lists of readings, and other books approved by the
instructor, should be kept upon reserved shelves for the constant
use of the class in the further study of questions suggested by
the text or raised in the classroom.

It will be noticed that the disputes and the technical language of
theorists have been throughout so far as possible avoided. The
discussion of historical theories and isms' is unnecessarily
bewildering to the beginner; and the aim has been rather to keep as
close as possible to the actual experience of the student and the
language of everyday life. Far more attention is given than in most
books on ethics to concrete contemporary problems. After all, an
insight into the fallacies of the reasoning of the various ethical
schools, an ability to know what they are talking about and glibly
refute them, is of less importance than an acquaintance with, and a
firm, intelligent attitude toward, the vital moral problems and
movements of the day. I have prayed to be saved from academic
abstractness and remoteness, and to go as straight as I could to the
real perplexities from which men suffer in deciding upon their conduct.
The purpose of a study of ethics is, primarily, to get light for the
guidance of life. And so, while referring to authors who differ from
the views here expressed, I have sought to impart a definite conception
of relative values, to offer a thread for guidance through the
labyrinth of moral problems, and to effect a heightened realization
of the importance and the possibilities of right living.

It is necessary, indeed, in order to justify and clarify our concrete
moral judgments, that we should reach clear and firmly grounded
conclusions upon the underlying abstract questions. And the habit of
laying aside upon occasion one's instinctive or habitual moral
preferences and discussing with open mind their justification and
rationality is of great value to the individual and to society. Hence
the first two Parts of this volume take up, as simply as is consonant
with the really intricate questions involved, the history of the
development of human morality and the psychological foundation of moral
obligations and ideals. The exposition of the meaning of right and
wrong there unfolded serves as a basis for the sound solution of the
confused concrete issues, private and then public, which are discussed
in the remainder of the volume.

An introductory outline of any subject must inevitably be superficial.
To explain all the discriminations that are important to the
specialist, to justify thoroughly all the positions taken, to do
adequate justice to opposing views, would require ten volumes instead
of one. And though there is a crying need of scholarly and elaborate
discussion of the endless problems of morality, there is a prior need
for the student of surveying the field, seeing what the problems are,
how they are related, and what is approximately certain. The impression
left by many ethical treatises, that everything is matter for dispute
and no moral judgments are reliable, seems to me unfortunate; I have
preferred to incur the charge of dogmatism rather than to fall into
that error to offer a clear cut set of standards, to which exception
will be taken by this critic or that, rather than to hold out to the
student a chaos of confused possibilities.

No originality of viewpoint is claimed for this book. Its raison d'etre
is simply to provide a clearer, more concrete, and more concisely
comprehensive view of the nature of morality and its summons to men
than has seemed to me available. I have drawn freely upon the thoughts
of ethical teachers, classic and contemporary. These ideas are, or
ought to be, common property; and it has been impracticable to trace
them to their sources and offer detailed acknowledgment. Nothing has
been presented here that has not first passed through the crucible
of my own thinking and experience; and where the sparks came from that
kindled each particular thought I am sure I do not know.

Portions of chapters xxi and xxix have appeared in the Forum and North
American Review respectively; to the editors of these periodicals my
thanks are due for permission to reprint.

DURANT DRAKE.

MlDDLETOWN, CONN, August 3, 1914.






CONTENTS





INTRODUCTORY.
What is the field of ethics? Why should we study ethics?

PART I. THE EVOLUTION OF MORALITY

CHAPTER I. THE ORIGIN OF PERSONAL MORALITY...
How early in the evolutionary process did personal morality
of some sort emerge?
What were the main causes that produced personal morality? How far
has the moralizing process been blind and how far conscious?

CHAPTER II. THE ORIGIN OF SOCIAL MORALITY...
How early was social morality developed?
By what means was social morality produced?
How has morality been fostered by the tribe?

CHAPTER III. OUTWARD DEVELOPMENT-MORALS...
What is the difference between morals and non-moral customs?
What, in general, has been the direction of moral progress?
What definition of morality emerges from this?
Is moral progress certain?

CHAPTER IV. INWARD DEVELOPMENT-CONSCIENCE...
What are the stages in the history of moral guidance?
Out of what has conscience developed?
What is conscience now?
What is the value of conscience?

CHAPTER V. THE INDIVIDUALIZING OF CONSCIENCE...
Why did not the individualizing of conscience occur earlier?
What forces made against custom-morality?
Conservatism vs. radicalism. What are the dangers of conventional
morality?

CHAPTER VI. CAN WE BASE MORALITY UPON CONSCIENCE...
What is the meaning of "moral intuitionism"?
Do the deliverances of different people's consciences agree?
If conscience everywhere agreed in its dictates, could we base
morality upon it?
What is the plausibility of moral intuitionism?

PART II. THE THEORY OF MORALITY

CHAPTER VII. THE BASIS OF RIGHT AND WRONG...
What is the nature of that intrinsic goodness upon which ultimately
all valuations rest?
What is extrinsic goodness?
What sort of conduct, then, is good?
And how shall we define virtue?

CHAPTER VIII. THE MEANING OF DUTY...
Why are there conflicts between duty and inclination?
Must we deny that duty is the servant of happiness?
Does the end justify the means?
What is the justification of justice and chivalry?

CHAPTER IX. THE JUDGMENT OF CHARACTER...
 Wherein consists goodness of character?
Can we say, with Kant, that the only good is the Good Will?
What evils may go with conscientiousness?
What is the justification of praise and blame?
What is responsibility?

CHAPTER X. THE SOLUTION OF PERSONAL PROBLEMS...
What are the inadequacies of instinct and impulse that necessitate
morality?
What factors are to be considered in estimating the worth
of personal moral ideals?
Epicureanism vs. Puritanism.
What are the evils in undue self-indulgence?
What are the evils in undue self-repression?

CHAPTER XI. THE SOLUTION OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS...
Why should we be altruistic?
What is the exact meaning of selfishness and unselfishness?
Are altruistic impulses always right?
What mental and moral obstacles hinder altruistic action?
How can we reconcile egoism and altruism?

CHAPTER XII. OBJECTIONS AND MISUNDERSTANDINGS...
Do men always act for pleasure or to avoid pain?
Are pleasures and pains incommensurable?
Are some pleasures worthier than others?
Is morality merely subjective and relative?

CHAPTER XIII. ALTEBNATIVE THEORIES...
Is morality "categorical," beyond need of justification?
Should we live "according to nature," and adjust ourselves
to the evolutionary process?
Is self-development, or self-realization, the ultimate end?
Is the source of duty the will of God?

CHAPTER XIV. THE WORTH OF MORALITY...
Morality as the organization of human interests.
Do moral acts always bring happiness somewhere?
Is there anything better than morality?

PART III. PERSONAL MORALITY

CHAPTER XV. HEALTH AND EFFICIENCY...
What is the moral importance of health?
Can we attain to greater health and efficiency?
Is continued idleness ever justifiable?
Are competitive athletics desirable? Is it wrong to smoke?

CHAPTER XVI. THE ALCOHOL PROBLEM...
What are the causes of the use of alcoholic drinks?
What are the evils that result from alcoholic liquors?
What should be the attitude of the individual toward
alcoholic liquors? What should be our attitude toward the use of
alcoholic liquors by others?

CHAPTER XVII. CHASTITY AND MARRIAGE...
What are the reasons for chastity before and fidelity after
marriage? What safeguards against unchastity are necessary?
What are the factors in an ideal marriage? 1Is divorce morally
justifiable?

CHAPTER XVIII. FELLOWSHIP, LOYALTY, AND LUXURY...
what social relationships impose claims upon us?
What general duties do we owe our fellows?
Are the rich justified in living in luxury?
Is it wrong to gamble, bet, or speculate?

CHAPTER XIX. TRUTHFULNESS AND ITS PROBLEMS...
What are the reasons for the obligation of truthfulness?
What exceptions are allowable to the duty of truthfulness?
In what directions are our standards of truthfulness low?
The ethics of journalism.

CHAPTER XX. CULTURE AND ART...
What is the value of culture and art?
What is most important in cultural education?
What dangers are there in culture and art for life?
Should art be censored in the interests of morality?

CHAPTER XXI. THE MECHANISM OF SELF-CONTROL...
What are our potentialities of greater self-control?
A practicable mechanism of self-control.
Various accessories and safeguards.

CHAPTER XXII. THE ATTAINABILITY OF HAPPINESS...
The threefold key to happiness:
I. Hearty allegiance to duty.
II. Hearty acquiescence in our lot.
III. Hearty appreciation of the wonder and beauty in life.
Can we maintain a steady under glow of happiness?

PART IV. PUBLIC MORALITY

CHAPTER XXIII. PATRIOTISM AND WORLD-PEACE...
What is the meaning and value of patriotism? How should patriotism
be directed and qualified? What have been the benefits of war? What
are the evils of war? What can we do to hasten world-peace?

CHAPTER XXIV. POLITICAL PURITY AND EFFICIENCY...
What are the forces making for corruption in politics?
What are the evil results of political corruption?
What is the political duty of the citizen?
What legislative checks to corruption are possible?

CHAPTER XXV. SOCIAL ALLEVIATION...
What is the duty of the State in regard to:
I. Sickness and preventable death?
II. Poverty and inadequate living conditions?
III. Commercialized vice?
IV. Crime?

CHAPTER XXVI. INDUSTRIAL WRONGS...
In our present organization of industry, what are the duties of
businessmen:
I. To the public?
II. To investors?
III. To competitors?
IV. To employees?
What general remedies for industrial wrongs are feasible?

CHAPTER XXVII. INDUSTRIAL RECONSTRUCTION...
Ought the trusts to be broken up, or regulated?
What are the ethics of the following schemes:
I. Trade-unions and strikes?
II. Profit-sharing, cooperation, consumers' leagues?
III. Government regulation of prices, profits, and wages?
IV. Socialism?

CHAPTER XXVIII. LIBERTY AND LAW...
What are the essential aspects of the ideal of liberty?
The ideal of individualism. The ideal of legal control.
Should existing laws always be obeyed?

CHAPTER XXIX. EQUALITY AND PRIVILEGE...
What flagrant forms of inequality exist in our society?
What methods of equalizing opportunity are possible?
What are the ethics of:
I. The single tax?
II. Free trade and protection?
III. The control of immigration?
IV. The woman's movement?

CHAPTER XXX. THE FUTURE OF THE RACE...
In what ways should the State seek to better human environment?
What should be done in the way of public education?
hat can be done by eugenics?
What are the gravest moral dangers of our times?




PROBLEMS OF CONDUCT


INTRODUCTORY

What is the field of ethics?

To know what exists, in its stark reality, is the concern of natural
science and natural philosophy; to know what matters, is the field
of moral philosophy, or ethics. The one group of studies deals with
facts simply as facts, the other with their values. Human life is
checkered with the sunshine and shadow of good and evil, joy and pain;
it is these qualitative differences that make it something more than
a meaningless eddy in the cosmic whirl. Natural philosophy (including
the physical and psychological sciences), drawing its impartial map
of existence, is interesting and important; it informs us about our
environment and ourselves, shows us our resources and our powers, what
we can do and how to do it. Moral philosophy asks the deeper and more
significant question, What SHALL we do? For the momentous fact about
life is that it has differences in value, and, more than that, that
we can MAKE differences in value. Caught as we are by the irresistible
flux of existence, we find ourselves able so to steer our lives as
to change the proportion of light and shade, to give greater value
to a life that might have had less. This possibility makes our moral
problem. What shall we choose and from what refrain? To what aims shall
we give our allegiance? What shall we fight for and what against?

For the savage practically all of his activity is determined by his
imperative needs, so that there is little opportunity for choice or
reflection upon the aims of his life. He must find food, and
shelter, and clothing to keep himself warm and dry; he must protect
himself from the enemies that menace him, and rest when he is tired.
Nor are most of us today far removed from that primitive condition;
the moments when we consciously choose and steer our course are few
and fleeting. Yet with the development of civilization the elemental
burdens are to some extent lifted; men come to have superfluous
strength, leisure hours, freedom to do something more than merely
earn their living. And further, with the development of
intelligence, new ways of fulfilling the necessary tasks suggest
themselves, moral problems arise where none were felt before. Men
learn that they have not made the most of their opportunities or
lived the best possible lives; they have veered this way and that
according to the moment's impulse, they have been misled by
ingrained habits and paralyzed by inertia, they have wandered at
random for lack of a clear vision of their goal. The task of the
moralist is to attain such a clear vision; to understand, first, the
basis of all preference, and then, in detail, the reasons for
preferring this concrete act to that. Here are a thousand impulses
and instincts drawing us, with infinite further possibilities
suggesting themselves to reflection; the more developed our natures
the more frequently do our desires conflict. Why is any one better
than another? How can we decide between them? Or shall we perhaps
disown them all for some other and better way.

Man's effort to solve these problems is revealed outwardly in a
multitude of precepts and laws, in customs and conventions; and
inwardly in the sense of duty and shame, in aspiration, in the
instinctive reactions of praise, blame, contentment, and remorse. The
leadings of these forces are, however, often divergent, sometimes
radically so. We must seek a completer insight. There must be some
best way of solving the problem of life, some happiest, most useful
way of living; its pursuit constitutes the field of ethics. Nothing
could be more practical, more vital, more universally human.

Why should we study ethics?

(1) The most obvious reason for the study of ethics is that we may
get more light for our daily problems. We are constantly having to
choose how we shall act and being perplexed by opposing advantages.
Decide one way or the other we must. On what grounds shall we decide?
How shall we feel assured that we are following a real duty, pursuing
an actual good, and not being led astray by a mere prejudice or
convention? The alternative is, to decide on impulse, at haphazard,
after some superficial and one-sided reflection; or to think the matter
through, to get some definite criteria for judgments, and to face the
recurrent question, what shall we do? In the steady light of those
principles. [Footnote: Cf. Matthew Arnold, Essays in Criticism, vol.
i: "Marcus Aurelius," opening paragraph: "The object of systems of
morality is to take possession of human life, to save it from being
abandoned to passion or allowed to drift at hazard, to give it happiness
by establishing it in the practice of virtue; and this object they
seek to attain by presenting to human life fixed principles of action,
fixed rules of conduct. In its uninspired as well as in its inspired
moments, in its days of languor or gloom as well as in its days of
sunshine and energy, human life has thus always a clue to follow, and
may always be making way towards its goal."]

(2) In addition to the fact that we all have unavoidable problems which
we must solve one way or another, a little familiarity with life, an
acquaintance with the biographies of great and good men, should lead
us to suspect that beyond the horizon of these immediate needs lie
whole ranges of beautiful and happy living to which comparatively few
ever attain. There are better ways of doing things than most of us
have dreamed. The study of ethics should reveal these vistas and
stimulate us to a noble discontent with our inferior morals. [Footnote:
Cf. Emerson, in a letter to Fraulein Gisela von Arnim: "In reading
your letter, I felt, as when I read rarely a good novel, rebuked that
I do not use in my life these delicious relations; or that I accept
anything inferior or ugly."] Such a forward look and development of
ideals not only adds greatly to the worth of life but prepares a man
to meet perplexities and temptations which may some day arise. It pays
to educate one's self for future emergencies by meditating not only
upon present problems but upon the further potentialities of conduct,
right and wrong, that may lie ahead, and building up a code for one's
self that will make life not only richer but steadier and more secure.

(3) Another advantage of a systematic study of ethics is that it can
make clearer to us WHY one act is better than another; why duty is
justified in thwarting our inclinations and conscience is to be obeyed.
Not only is this an intellectual gain, but it is an immense
fortification to the will. There comes a time in the experience of
every thinking man when a command not reinforced by a reason breeds
distrust, and when until he can intelligently defend an ideal he will
hesitate to give it his allegiance. Morality, to be depended upon,
must be not a mere matter of breeding and convention, or of impulse
and emotion, but the result of rational insight and conscious resolve.
To many people morality seems nothing but convention, or an arbitrary
tyranny, or a mysterious and awful necessity, something extraneous
to their own desires, from which they would like to escape. To be able
to refute these skeptics, expose the sophisms and specious arguments
by which they support their wrongdoing, and show that they have chosen
the lesser good, is a valuable help to the community and to one's own
integrity of conduct. Too often the people perish for lack of vision;
an understanding of the naturalness and enormous desirability of
morality, together with an appreciation of its main injunctions, would
enlist upon its side many restless spirits who now chafe under a sense
of needless restraint and seek some delusory freedom which leads to
pain and death. Morality is simply the best way of living; and the
more fully men realize that, the more readily will they submit themselves
to the sacrifices it requires.

(4) Finally, a study of ethics should help us to see what are the
prevalent sins and moral dangers of our day, and thus arouse us to
put the weight of our blame and praise where they are needed. Widespread
public opinion is a force of incalculable power, which is largely
unused. Politics and business, and to a far greater extent than now
private life, will become clean and honest and kind just so soon as
a sufficient number of people wake up and demand it. We have the power
to make sins which are now generally tolerated and respectable, so
odious, so infamous, that they will practically disappear. There are
certain of the older forms of sin which the race in its long struggle
upward has so effectually blacklisted that only a few perverts now
lapse into them; we have execrated out of existence whole classes of
cruelty and vice. But with the changing and ever more complex relations
of society new forms of sin continually creep in; these we have not
yet come to brand with the odium they deserve. Leaders of society and
pillars of the church are often, and usually without disturbance of
conscience, guilty of wrongdoing as grave in its effects, or graver,
than many of the faults we relentlessly chastise. On the other hand,
many really useful reforms are blocked because they awaken old prejudices
or cross silly and meaningless conventions. The air is full of proposals,
invectives, causes, movements; how shall we know which to espouse and
which to reject, or where best to lend a hand? We need a consistent
and well-founded point of view from which to judge. To get such a sane
and far-sighted moral perspective; to see the acts of our fellow men
with a proper valuation; to be able to point out the insidious dangers
of conduct which is not yet as generally rebuked as it ought to be;
and at the same time to emancipate ourselves and others from the mistaken
and merely arbitrary precepts that are intermingled with our genuine
morality, and so attain the largest possible freedom of action, such
should be the outcome of a thorough study of ethical principles and
ideals.




PART I


THE EVOLUTION OF MORALITY




CHAPTER I


THE ORIGIN OP PERSONAL MORALITY

In almost any field it is wise to precede definition by an impartial
survey of the subject matter. So if we are to form an unbiased
conception of what morality is, it will be safest to consider first
what the morals of men actually have been, how they came into being,
and what function they have served in human life. Thus we shall be
sure that our theory is in touch with reality, and be saved from mere
closet-philosophies and irrelevant speculations. Our task in this First
Part will be not to criticize by reference to any ethical standards,
but to observe and describe, as a mere bit of preliminary sociology,
what it is in their lives to which men have given the name "morality,"
of what use it has been, and through the action of what forces it has
tended to develop. With these data in mind, we shall be the better
able, in the Second Part, to formulate our criteria for judging the
different codes of morality; we shall find that we are but making
explicit and conscious the considerations that, unexpressed and
unrealized, have been the persistent and underlying factors in their
development. How early in the evolutionary process did personal
morality of some sort emerge? Of course the words (in any language)
and the explicit conceptions "morality," "duty," "right," "wrong," etc,
are very late in appearance, presupposing as they do a power of
reflection and abstraction which develops only in man and with a
considerable civilization. Even in the Homeric poems, which reflect
a degree of mental cultivation in some respects equal to our own, these
concepts hardly appear. But ages earlier, far back in the course of
animal evolution, there emerged phenomena which we may consider
rudimentary forms of morality; and all early human history was replete
writh unanalyzed and unformulated moral struggles. Concretely, we mean
by personal morality courage, industriousness, self-control, prudence,
temperance, and other similar phenomena, which have this in common,
that they involve a crossing of earlier-developed impulses and
redirection of the individual's conduct, with the result, normally,
that his welfare is enhanced. Exceptions to this result will be
considered later; but the point to be noted at the outset is that
personal morality is not at first the outcome of reflection, or a
purely human affair. If we were to take the term "morality" in a
narrower sense, as meaning conscious obedience to a sense of duty or
to the moral law, it would obviously be a late product. But morality
in this sense is only an ultimate development of what in its less
conscious and reflective forms dates far back in pre-human history.

Take courage, for example, which may be briefly defined as action in
spite of the instinct of fear and contrary to its leading. Nearly all
of the higher animals exhibit courage in greater or less degree, and
there are many touching instances of it recorded to the credit of those
we best know. Industriousness, again, is proverbial in the case of
bees and ants "Go to the ant, thou sluggard!"--and noteworthy in the
case of many birds, of beavers, and a long list of other animals.
Prudence may be illustrated by the case of the camel who fills himself
with water enough to last for many desert days, or that of the bird
who builds her nest with remarkable ingenuity and pains out of the
reach of invaders. Whether or not we shall attribute self-control to
the lower animals is a mere matter of definition; in the looser sense
we may credit with it the hungry fox who does not touch the bait whose
dangerous nature he vaguely suspects. Temperance is probably one of
the latest of the virtues, and is rather conspicuously absent in much
of human history and biography; but perhaps students of animal psychology
can guarantee instances to which the name might fairly be given.

In lesser degree, then, but unmistakably present, we find the same
sort of conduct appearing in the animals to which we give in man the
names courage, prudence, etc. Purely instinctive these acts usually
are though we may see even in the animals the beginnings of mental
conflicts, of reasoning, of reflection. But morality (if we keep to
the wider sense of the term) is none the less morality when it is
instinctive and natural. Morality is a general name for certain KINDS
of conduct, certain redirections of impulse. These redirections
appeared in animal life long before the emergence of what we may call
man from his ape-like ancestry; and all of our self-conscious moral
idealism is but a continuation and development of the process then
begun. Any theory of right and wrong must take account of the fact
that morality, unlike art, science, and religion, is not an exclusively
human affair. In contrast with these late and purely human innovations,
it is hoary with antiquity and the possession, in some rudimentary
form or other, of nearly the whole realm of organic life.

What were the main causes that produced personal morality?

How did these germinal forms of courage, prudence, industriousness,
etc, first come into existence? The answer to this question will also
show what are the main underlying causes that promote these virtues
today.

(1) They are in part due to certain organic needs and cravings which
exist independently of the individual's environment. Hunger and thirst
imperiously check the tendency to laziness, or heedlessness, and
stimulate to industriousness and prudence. To this day the mere need
of food and clothing and shelter is the main bulwark of these virtues.
The acquisitive impulse, which is also rather early in appearance,
has an increasing share in this sort of moralization. The craving for
action, which is the natural result of abundant nervous and muscular
energy, the combative instinct, the joy of conquest and achievement,
and the sexual impulse, go far in counteracting cowardice and inertia.
The artistic impulse, when it emerges in man, long before the dawn
of history, makes against caprice for orderliness, self-control, and
patience. Ambition is a potent force in human affairs. The desire for
the approval of others, which is prehuman, makes for all the virtues.

(2) But in addition to these inward springs of morality there is the
constant pressure of a hostile environment. Cold, storms, rivers that
block journeys, forests that must be felled, treacherous seas that
lure with promise and exact toll for carelessness, arouse men out of
their torpor and aid the development of the virtues we have been
considering. The necessity of rearing some sort of shelter makes against
laziness for industry and perseverance. The dangers of wind or flood
check heedlessness in the choice of location for the home and foster
prudence and foresight. In the harsher climates man is more goaded
by nature; hence more moral progress has, probably, been effected in
the temperate than in the tropical zones.

(3) A third and very important source lies in the mutual hostility
of the animal species and of men. Slothfulness and recklessness mean
for the great majority of animals the imminent risk of becoming the
prey of some stronger animal. Among tribes of men the ceaseless struggles
for supremacy have pricked cowardice into courage, demanded self-control
instead of temper, supplanted gluttony and drunkenness by temperance.
Cruel as has been the suffering caused by war, and deplorable as most
of its effects, it did a great deal in the early stages of man's
history to promote the personal virtues, alertness, moderation,
caution, courage, and efficiency.

In the latest stages of man's development, conscious regard for law
and custom, the fear of gods, the explicit recognition of duty and
conscience, and the direct pursuit of ideals-all the reflective
considerations that we may lump together under the word
"conscientiousness"-play their ever increasing part and complicate
the psychological situation. But even in modern civilized man the
underlying animal forces count for far more. And without them the later
self-conscious forces would not have come into play at all. There is
a small class of people who are dominated throughout their activities
by consciously present ideals or obedience to religious injunctions.
But the average man still acts mainly under the pressure of the more
primitive forces which we have enumerated.

How far has the moralizing process been blind and how far conscious?

(1) To a very large extent the moralizing process has been a merely
mechanical one. Through slight differences in nerve-structure
individuals have varied a little in their response to the pressure
of inward cravings and outward perils. The braver, the more prudent,
the more industrious have had a better chance of survival. So by the
process which we have come to call natural selection there has been
a continual weeding-out of the relatively lazy, cowardly, reckless,
and imprudent. Much of our morality is the result of tendencies thus
long cultivated by the ruthless methods of nature; we inherit a complex
nervous organization, the outcome of ages of molding and selection,
which now instinctively and easily responds to stimuli with a certain
degree of inbred morality. This is the case much more than is apparent
upon the surface. The child seems very unmoral, the mere prey of
passing impulses; but latent in his brain are many aptitudes and
tendencies which will at the proper time ripen and manifest themselves.
The period of adolescence is that during which the changes in mental
structure which were effected during the later stages of evolution
are being made in the mind of this new individual; he reenacts, as
it were, in a few years, the history of the race, and emerges without
any conscious effort, the possessor of the fruits of that long struggle
of which he was always the heir.

(2) In all the later stages of animal evolution, however, moral
development is largely conscious, or semi-conscious. Besides our inner
inheritance of altered brain-paths there is a social inheritance of
habits which each generation adopts by imitation of its predecessors.
Without any deliberate intention, the young of every species imitate
their parents, and then the older members of the flock or herd.
"Suggestion" is said by some to be the chief means of moralization;
we are brave or industrious because we see others practicing these
virtues and naturally do as they do. At any rate, whichever are more
important, the inherited tendencies or those acquired by contagion,
both of these factors play a large part in the development of the
individual's morals.

(3) The third method of moral development is that which we call
"learning by experience." The pain or dissatisfaction which a wrong
impulse brings in its train, the satisfaction which follows a moral
act, are remembered, and recur with the recurrence of a similar
situation, becoming perhaps the decisive factors in steering the animal
or man toward his true welfare. Many animals quite low in the organic
scale learn by experience; and though of course the degree of
consciousness that accompanies these readjustments varies enormously,
this method of moralization may be said to be always, like the
preceding, a more or less conscious process. Learning by experience
is subject, of course, to many mistaken judgments; the fallacy of post
hoc propter hoc leads many learners to avoid perfectly innocent acts
as supposedly involving some evil result with which they were once
by chance connected; and the true causes of the evils are often
overlooked. Even when dimly conscious readjustments become highly
conscious deliberation, the results of that deliberation may be less
forwarding morally than the unconscious and merciless grinding of
natural selection.

More and more, of course, as men grew in power of reflection, did they
consciously shape their morals; and this intelligent selection, which
has as yet played a comparatively small role, is bound, as men become
more and more rational, to supersede in importance the other factors
in moral evolution. But in the later phases of evolution all three
of these processes blend together; and it would be impossible for the
keenest analyst to tell how much of his conduct was determined in each
of these ways.

H. Spencer, Data of Ethics (also published as the first part of his
Principles of Ethics), chap. I and chap. II, through sec. 4; or J.
Fiske, Cosmic Philosophy, part II, chap, XXII, first half, to "We are
now prepared to deal." L. T. Hobhouse, Morals in Evolution, part
I, chap. I, secs. 1-4. I. King, Development of Religion, pp. 48-59
A great mass of concrete material will be found in E. Westermarck's
Origin and Development of Moral Ideas, H. O. Taylor's Ancient Ideals,
W. E. H. Leeky's History of European Morals.




CHAPTER II


THE ORIGIN OF SOCIAL MORALITY

How early was social morality developed?

By social morality we mean, concretely, such virtues as tender and
fostering love, sympathy, obedience, subordination of selfish instincts
to group-demands, the service of other individuals or of the group.
These habits are later in development than some of the personal
virtues, but long antedate the differentiation of man from the other
animals. Instances of self-sacrificing devotion of parent to offspring
among birds and beasts are too common to need mention. Devotion to
the mate, though less developed, is early present in many species.
The strict subordination of ants and bees to the common welfare is
a well-known marvel, the latter enthusiastically and poetically
described by Maeterlinck in his delightful Life of the Bees. The stern
requirements of obedience to the unwritten laws of the herd, which
make powerful so many species of animals individually weak, are
graphically, though of course with exaggeration, set forth by Kipling
in his Jungle Book. Many sorts of animals, such as deer and antelopes,
might long ago have been exterminated but for their mutual cooperation
and service. Affection and sympathy in high degree are evident in some
sub-human species. When we come to man, we find his earliest recorded
life based upon a social morality which, if crude, was in some respects
stricter than that of today. It is a mistake to think of the savage
as Rousseau imagined him, a freehearted, happy-go-lucky individualist,
only by a cramping civilization bowed under the yoke of laws and
conventions. Savage life is essentially group-life; the individual
is nothing, the tribe everything. The gods are tribal gods, warfare
is tribal warfare, hunting, sowing, harvesting, are carried on by the
community as a whole. There are few personal possessions, there is
little personal will; obedience to the tribal customs, and mutual
cooperation, are universal. [Footnote: As an example of the solidarity
of barbarous tribes, note how Abimelech, seeking election as king,
says to "all the men of Shechem": "Remember that I am your bone and
your flesh." (Judges IX, 2.) Later, "all the tribes of Israel" say
to David, "Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh." (2 Sam. V, 1.) Of
savage life as observed in modern times we have many reports like this:
"Many strange customs and laws obtain in Zululand, but there is no
moral code in all the world more rigidly observed than that of the
Zulus." (R. H. Millward, quoted by Myers, History as Past Ethics, p.
11.) Compare this: "A Kafir feels that the 'frame that binds him in'
extends to the clan. The sense of solidarity of the family in Europe
is thin and feeble compared to the full-blooded sense of corporate
union of the Kafir clan. The claims of the clan entirely swamp the
rights of the individual." (Kidd, Savage Childhood, p. 74.) An elaborate
and stern social morality, then, long preceded verbally formulated
laws; it was a matter of instinct and emotion long before it was a
matter of calculation or conscience. The most primitive men acknowledge
a duty to their neighbors; and the subsequent advance of social morality
has consisted simply in more and more comprehensive answers to the
questions, What is my duty? and Who is my neighbor? At first, the
neighbor was the fellow tribesman only, all outsiders being deemed
fair prey. Every member of the clan instinctively arose to avenge an
injury to any other member, and rejoiced in triumphs over their common
foes. We still have survivals of this primitive code in the Corsican
vendettas and Kentucky feuds. With the growth of nations, the cooperative
spirit came to embrace wider and wider circles; but even as yet there
is little of it in international relations. The old double standard
of morality persists in spite of the command to which we give theoretic
allegiance-"Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love
thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your
enemies!" From the same lips came the final answer to the question,
"Who is my neighbour?" It can be found in the tenth chapter of the
Gospel according to Luke. By what means was social morality produced?

(1) The earliest source of social morality lies in the maternal
instinct; the first animal that took care of its young stood at the
beginning of this wonderful advance. The originating causes of the
first slight care of eggs or offspring lay, no doubt, in some obscure
physiological readjustments, due to forces irrelevant to morality.
But the young that had even such slight care had a survival advantage
over their rivals, and would transmit the rudimentary instinct to their
offspring. Thus, given a start in that direction, natural selection,
steadily favoring the more maternally disposed, produced species with
a highly developed and long continuing maternal love. In similar manner
but in lesser degree a paternal instinct was developed. The existence
of these instincts implied the power of sympathy and altruistic action
that is, action by one individual for another's welfare. From sympathy
for offspring to sympathy for mate and other members of the group was
but a step; and all sympathetic action may have its ultimate source
in mother love.

(2) Not only was natural selection early at work in the rivalry for
existence between individuals, protecting those stocks that had the
stronger maternal and paternal instincts, but it played an important
part in the struggle between groups. Those species that developed the
ability to keep together for mutual protection or for advantage. And
within a species those particular herds or flocks or tribes that
cooperated best outlived the others. With the strongest animals, such
as lions and tigers, and with the weakest, such as rabbits and mice,
the instinct to stand by one another is of no value and so was never
fostered by natural selection. But in many species of animals of
intermediate strength, that by cooperation might be able to resist
attack or overcome enemies that they would singly be impotent against,
the cooperative instinct became strongly developed. Notably in such
case was man; and we find group consciousness, tribal loyalty,
continually enhanced by the killing off of the tribes in which it was
feebler. The dominant races in man's internecine struggles have been
those of passionate patriotism and capacity for working together.
Nature has socialized man by a repeated application of the method
hinted at in the adage "United we stand, divided we fall." Successful
war demands loyalty and obedience, self-forgetfulness and mutual
service. It demands also the cessation of internal squabbling, the
restraint of individual greed, lust, and caprice. At first instinctive,
these virtues came with clearing consciousness to be deliberately
cultivated by the tribe, in ways which we shall in a moment indicate.

(3) As in the development of personal morality, the hostility of
inanimate nature, coupled with the urgency of inner needs, has also
played its part in the socialization of man. The satisfying of hunger,
protection against storm, flood, and other physical calamities, is
greatly forwarded by cooperation. The rearing of a shelter, for
example, that shall be at all comfortable and secure, demands the labor
of several. With the development of civilization, mutual assistance
and the division of labor become more and more imperative. As man
developed more and more into a reflective animal, the comprehension
of these advantages became clearer and clearer to him. Resentment against
mere individualism grew keener; and any member whose laziness or passions
led him to pull apart from the common good had to incur the anger of
his fellows. Under these three heads--the selection of the maternal
instinct, with its potentialities of universal sympathy, through the
struggle between individuals; the selection of the various powers of
loyalty and cooperation through the struggle between groups; and the
production of cooperative habits through the struggle with inanimate
nature-we may group the causes of social morality in man. How has
morality been fostered by the tribe? Social morality, like personal
morality, is passed on from generation to generation by heredity and
by imitation. Both, in historic man, are also deliberately cultivated
by the tribe. We have discriminated between the two aspects of morality
for theoretic reasons which will later become apparent; but no
discrimination is possible or needful for the savage. Courage and
prudence and industriousness and temperance in its members are assets
of the tribe, and are included among its requirements. We shall now
consider in what ways the group brings pressure to bear upon the
individual and influences his moral development.

(1) It needs no great powers of observation to convince the members
of a tribe severally that immorality of any sort-laziness, cowardice,
unrestrained lust, recklessness, quarrelsomeness, insubordination,
etc. in another member is detrimental to him personally. His own security
and the satisfaction of his needs are thereby in some degree decreased.
Contentment at the morality of the other members of the group, and
anger at their immorality, are therefore among the earliest
psychological reactions. No men, however savage, are insensitive to
these attitudes of their fellows; and the emotional response of others
to their acts is from the beginning a powerful force for morality.
When contentment becomes explicitly expressed, becomes praise,
commendation, honor; when anger becomes openly uttered blame, contempt,
ridicule, rebuke, their power is well nigh irresistible. A civilized
man, with his manifold resources, may defy public opinion; the savage,
who cannot with safety live alone and has few personal interests to
fill his mind, is unavoidably subject to its sting. His impulses and
passions lead him often to immoral conduct, but he is pretty sure to
suffer from the condemnation of his fellows. The memory of that penalty
in his own case, or the sight of it in the case of others, may be a
considerable deterrent; while, on the other hand, the craving for
applause and esteem may be a powerful incentive.

(2) Even among some of the animals, the resentment against the
misconduct of a member of the herd finds expression in outward
punishment maltreatment or death. Among men, punishments for the
immoral and outward honors for the virtuous antedate history.
Decorations, tattoos, songs, for the conspicuously brave and efficient,
death or some lesser penalty for the cowardly, the traitorous, the
insubordinate, figure largely in primitive life. These honors are
capricious, uncertain, and transitory; but they are undoubtedly more
stimulating to the savage, who lives in the moment, than they are in
the more complex existence of the modern man. And while in general
the savage is more callous to punishments, he has to fear much severer
penalties than our humane conscience allows. They are inflicted, of
course, with greatest frequency for those sins which instinctively
arouse the hottest anger; that in turn varies with different types
of men and various accidental circumstances that have determined the
tribal points of view. But in general it is the virtues that most
obviously benefit the tribe that are rewarded, and those that most
obviously harm it that are punished.

(3) Another important means of securing morality in the tribe is the
education of the young. This includes not only deliberate instruction,
encouragement, and warning, but various symbolic rites and customs,
whose value in impressing the plastic minds of the boys and girls of
the tribe is only half realized. Initiation into manhood is accompanied
in many races of men by solemn ceremonies, which instill into the youth
the necessity and glory of courage, endurance, self-control, and other
virtues. The maidens are taught by equally solemn rites the
obligatoriness of chastity. The lowest races studied by anthropologists
which, however, represent, of course, the result of ages of evolution
have commonly an elaborate provision for the guidance of the young
into the paths of the tribal morals.

(4) Further, all occasions upon which the tribe gets together for
common work or play strengthen the group loyalty and make the group
welfare appeal to the member as his own good. Hunting expeditions and
wars, the sowing and reaping of the communal harvest, births,
marriages, and deaths, in which usually the group as a whole takes
a keen interest, feasts and dances, bard recitals, in common
undertakings, dangers, calamities, triumphs, and celebrations, merge
the individuality of the separate members into a unity. In many
primitive races these influences are so strong that the individual
has