# The Emerald Tablet of Hermes
Author: Anónimo
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #35661
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:19:45.105391
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 THE WORKS OF
 E. PHILLIPS
 OPPENHEIM

 MYSTERIOUS MR. SABIN

 McKINLAY, STONE & MACKENZIE

 NEW YORK




 _Copyright, 1905_,

 BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.

 _All rights reserved_




 [Illustration: "The girl's face shone like a piece of delicate
 statuary" (_page 37_).
                               [_Frontispiece_.]




CONTENTS


    CHAP.                                                   PAGE

       I. A SUPPER PARTY AT THE "MILAN"                       7
      II. A DRAMA OF THE PAVEMENT                            13
     III. THE WARNING OF FELIX                               22
      IV. AT THE RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR'S                        30
       V. THE DILEMMA OF WOLFENDEN                           39
      VI. A COMPACT OF THREE                                 46
     VII. WHO IS MR. SABIN?                                  52
    VIII. A MEETING IN BOND STREET                           61
      IX. THE SHADOWS THAT GO BEFORE                         69
       X. THE SECRETARY                                      76
      XI. THE FRUIT THAT IS OF GOLD                          83
     XII. WOLFENDEN'S LUCK                                   92
    XIII. A GREAT WORK                                      104
     XIV. THE TEMPTING OF MR. BLATHERWICK                   111
      XV. THE COMING AND GOING OF MR. FRANKLIN WILMOT       118
     XVI. GENIUS OR MADNESS?                                126
    XVII. THE SCHEMING OF GIANTS                            132
   XVIII. "HE HAS GONE TO THE EMPEROR!"                     141
     XIX. WOLFENDEN'S LOVE-MAKING                           146
      XX. FROM A DIM WORLD                                  155
     XXI. HARCUTT'S INSPIRATION                             167
    XXII. FROM THE BEGINNING                                177
   XXIII. MR. SABIN EXPLAINS                                186
    XXIV. THE WAY OF THE WOMAN                              193
     XXV. A HANDFUL OF ASHES                                199
    XXVI. MR. BLATHERWICK AS ST. ANTHONY                    207
   XXVII. BY CHANCE OR DESIGN                               213
  XXVIII. A MIDNIGHT VISITOR                                220
    XXIX. "IT WAS MR. SABIN"                                227
     XXX. THE GATHERING OF THE WAR-STORM                    234
    XXXI. "I MAKE NO PROMISE"                               242
   XXXII. THE SECRET OF MR. SABIN'S NIECE                   253
  XXXIII. MR. SABIN TRIUMPHS                                263
   XXXIV. BLANCHE MERTON'S LITTLE PLOT                      269
    XXXV. A LITTLE GAME OF CARDS                            276
   XXXVI. THE MODERN RICHELIEU                              287
  XXXVII. FOR A GREAT STAKE                                 295
 XXXVIII. THE MEN WHO SAVED ENGLAND                         304
   XXXIX. THE HEART OF THE PRINCESS                         314
      XL. THE WAY TO PAU                                    319
     XLI. MR. AND MRS. WATSON OF NEW YORK                   327
    XLII. A WEAK CONSPIRATOR                                333
   XLIII. THE COMING OF THE "KAISER WILHELM"                341
    XLIV. THE GERMANS ARE ANNOYED                           346
     XLV. MR. SABIN IN DANGER                               353
    XLVI. MR. WATSON IS ASTONISHED                          358
   XLVII. A CHARMED LIFE                                    363
  XLVIII. THE DOOMSCHEN                                     368
    XLIX. MR. SABIN IS SENTIMENTAL                          374
       L. A HARBOUR TRAGEDY                                 378
      LI. THE PERSISTENCE OF FELIX                          383
     LII. MRS. JAMES B. PETERSON, OF LENOX                  388




MYSTERIOUS MR. SABIN




CHAPTER I

A SUPPER PARTY AT THE "MILAN."


"To all such meetings as these!" cried Densham, lifting his champagne
glass from under the soft halo of the rose-shaded electric lights. "Let
us drink to them, Wolfenden--Mr. Felix!"

"To all such meetings!" echoed his _vis-a-vis_, also fingering the
delicate stem of his glass. "An excellent toast!"

"To all such meetings as these!" murmured the third man, who made up the
little party. "A capital toast indeed!"

They sat at a little round table in the brilliantly-lit supper-room of
one of London's most fashionable restaurants. Around them were the usual
throng of well dressed men, of women with bare shoulders and flashing
diamonds, of dark-visaged waiters, deft, silent, swift-footed. The
pleasant hum of conversation, louder and more unrestrained as the hour
grew towards midnight, was varied by the popping of corks and many
little trills of feminine laughter. Of discordant sounds there were
none. The waiters' feet fell noiselessly upon the thick carpet, the
clatter of plates was a thing unheard of. From the balcony outside came
the low, sweet music of a German orchestra played by master hands.

As usual the place was filled. Several late-comers, who had neglected to
order their table beforehand, had already, after a disconsolate tour of
the room, been led to one of the smaller apartments, or had driven off
again to where the lights from the larger but less smart Altone flashed
out upon the smooth, dark waters of the Thames. Only one table was as
yet unoccupied, and that was within a yard or two of the three young men
who were celebrating a chance meeting in Pall Mall so pleasantly. It was
laid for two only, and a magnificent bunch of white roses had, a few
minutes before, been brought in and laid in front of one of the places
by the director of the rooms himself. A man's small visiting-card was
leaning against a wineglass. The table was evidently reserved by some
one of importance, for several late-comers had pointed to it, only to be
met by a decided shake of the head on the part of the waiter to whom
they had appealed. As time went on, this empty table became the object
of some speculation to the three young men.

"Our neighbours," remarked Wolfenden, "are running it pretty fine. Can
you see whose name is upon the card, Densham?"

The man addressed raised an eyeglass to his left eye and leaned forward.
Then he shook his head, he was a little too far away.

"No! It is a short name. Seems to begin with S. Probably a son of
Israel!"

"His taste in flowers is at any rate irreproachable," Wolfenden
remarked. "I wish they would come. I am in a genial mood, and I do not
like to think of any one having to hurry over such an excellent supper."

"The lady," Densham suggested, "is probably theatrical, and has to dress
after the show. Half-past twelve is a barbarous hour to turn us out. I
wonder----"

"Sh-sh!"

The slight exclamation and a meaning frown from Wolfenden checked his
speech. He broke off in the middle of his sentence, and looked round.
There was the soft swish of silk passing his chair, and the faint
suggestion of a delicate and perfectly strange perfume. At last the
table was being taken possession of. A girl, in a wonderful white
dress, was standing there, leaning over to admire the great bunch of
creamy-white blossoms, whilst a waiter respectfully held a chair for
her. A few steps behind came her companion, an elderly man who walked
with a slight limp, leaning heavily upon a stick. She turned to him and
made some remark in French, pointing to the flowers. He smiled, and
passing her, stood for a moment leaning slightly upon the back of his
chair, waiting, with a courtesy which was obviously instinctive, until
she should have seated herself. During the few seconds which elapsed
before they were settled in their places he glanced around the room with
a smile, slightly cynical, but still good-natured, parting his thin,
well-shaped lips. Wolfenden and Densham, who were looking at him with
frank curiosity, he glanced at carelessly. The third young man of the
party, Felix, was bending low over his plate, and his face was hidden.

The buzz of conversation in their immediate vicinity had been
temporarily suspended. Every one who had seen them enter had been
interested in these late-comers, and many curious eyes had followed
them to their seats. Briefly, the girl was beautiful and the man
distinguished. When they had taken their places, however, the hum of
conversation recommenced. Densham and Wolfenden leaned over to one
another, and their questions were almost simultaneous.

"Who are they?"

"Who is she?"

Alas! neither of them knew; neither of them had the least idea. Felix,
Wolfenden's guest, it seemed useless to ask. He had only just arrived in
England, and he was a complete stranger to London. Besides, he did not
seem to be interested. He was proceeding calmly with his supper, with
his back directly turned upon the new-comers. Beyond one rapid, upward
glance at their entrance he seemed almost to have avoided looking at
them. Wolfenden thought of this afterwards.

"I see Harcutt in the corner," he said. "He will know who they are for
certain. I shall go and ask him."

He crossed the room and chatted for a few minutes with a noisy little
party in an adjacent recess. Presently he put his question. Alas! not
one of them knew! Harcutt, a journalist of some note and a man who
prided himself upon knowing absolutely everybody, was as helpless as
the rest. To his humiliation he was obliged to confess it.

"I never saw either of them before in my life," he said. "I cannot
imagine who they can be. They are certainly foreigners."

"Very likely," Wolfenden agreed quietly. "In fact, I never doubted it.
An English girl of that age--she is very young by the bye--would never
be so perfectly turned out."

"What a very horrid thing to say, Lord Wolfenden," exclaimed the woman
on whose chair his hand was resting. "Don't you know that dressing is
altogether a matter of one's maid? You may rely upon it that that girl
has found a treasure!"

"Well, I don't know," Wolfenden said, smiling. "Young English girls
always seem to me to look so dishevelled in evening dress. Now this girl
is dressed with the art of a Frenchwoman of mature years, and yet with
the simplicity of a child."

The woman laid down her lorgnettes and shrugged her shoulders.

"I agree with you," she said, "that she is probably not English. If she
were she would not wear such diamonds at her age."

"By the bye," Harcutt remarked with sudden cheerfulness, "we shall be
able to find out who the man is when we leave. The table was reserved,
so the name will be on the list at the door."

His friends rose to leave and Harcutt, making his adieux, crossed the
room with Wolfenden.

"We may as well have our coffee together," he said. "I ordered Turkish
and I've been waiting for it ten minutes. We got here early. Hullo!
where's your other guest?"

Densham was sitting alone. Wolfenden looked at him inquiringly.

"Your friend Felix has gone," he announced. "Suddenly remembered an
engagement with his chief, and begged you to excuse him. Said he'd look
you up to-morrow."

"Well, he's an odd fellow," Wolfenden remarked, motioning Harcutt to the
vacant place. "His looks certainly belie his name."

"He's not exactly a cheerful companion for a supper party," Densham
admitted, "but I like his face. How did you come across him, Wolfenden,
and where does he hail from?"

"He's a junior attache at the Russian Embassy," Wolfenden said, stirring
his coffee. "Only just been appointed. Charlie Meynell gave him a line
of introduction to me; said he was a decent sort, but mopish! I looked
him up last week, met him in Pall Mall just as you came along, and asked
you both to supper. What liqueurs, Harcutt?"

The conversation drifted into ordinary channels and flowed on steadily.
At the same time it was maintained with a certain amount of difficulty.
The advent of these two people at the next table had produced an
extraordinary effect upon the three men. Harcutt was perhaps the least
affected. He was a young man of fortune and natural gifts, who had
embraced journalism as a career, and was really in love with his
profession. Partly on account of his social position, which was
unquestioned, and partly because his tastes tended in that direction,
he had become the recognised scribe and chronicle of smart society. His
pen was easy and fluent. He was an inimitable maker of short paragraphs.
He prided himself upon knowing everybody and all about them. He could
have told how much a year Densham, a rising young portrait painter,
was making from his profession, and exactly what Wolfenden's allowance
from his father was. A strange face was an annoyance to him; too, a
humiliation. He had been piqued that he could not answer the eager
questions of his own party as to these two people, and subsequently
Wolfenden's inquiries. The thought that very soon at any rate their name
would be known to him was, in a sense, a consolation. The rest would be
easy. Until he knew all about them he meant to conceal so far as
possible his own interest.




CHAPTER II

A DRAMA OF THE PAVEMENT


The pitch of conversation had risen higher, still mingled with the
intermittent popping of corks and the striking of matches. Blue wreaths
of cigarette smoke were curling upwards--a delicate feeling of "abandon"
was making itself felt amongst the roomful of people. The music grew
softer as the babel of talk grew in volume. The whole environment became
tinged with a faint but genial voluptuousness. Densham was laughing over
the foibles of some mutual acquaintance; Wolfenden leaned back in his
chair, smoking a cigarette and sipping his Turkish coffee. His eyes
scarcely left for a moment the girl who sat only a few yards away from
him, trifling with a certain dainty indifference with the little dishes,
which one after the other had been placed before her and removed. He had
taken pains to withdraw himself from the discussion in which his friends
were interested. He wanted to be quite free to watch her. To him she was
certainly the most wonderful creature he had ever seen. In every one
of her most trifling actions she seemed possessed of an original and
curious grace, even the way she held her silver fork, toyed with her
serviette, raised her glass to her lips and set it down again--all these
little things she seemed to him to accomplish with a peculiar and
wonderful daintiness. Of conversation between her companion and herself
there was evidently very little, nor did she appear to expect it. He
was enjoying his supper with the moderation and minute care for trifles
which denote the epicure, and he only spoke to her between the courses.
She, on the other hand, appeared to be eating scarcely anything. At
last, however, the waiter set before her a dish in which she was
evidently interested. Wolfenden recognised the pink frilled paper and
smiled. She was human enough then to care for ices. She bent over it
and shrugged her shoulders--turning to the waiter who was hovering near,
she asked a question. He bowed and removed the plate. In a moment or two
he reappeared with another. This time the paper and its contents were
brown. She smiled as she helped herself--such a smile that Wolfenden
wondered that the waiter did not lose his head, and hand her pepper and
salt instead of gravely filling her glass. She took up her spoon and
deliberately tasted the contents of her plate. Then she looked across
the table, and spoke the first words in English which he had heard from
her lips--

"Coffee ice. So much nicer than strawberry!"

The man nodded back.

"Ices after supper are an abomination," he said. "They spoil the flavour
of your wine, and many other things. But after all, I suppose it is
waste of time to tell you so! A woman never understands how to eat until
she is fifty."

She laughed, and deliberately finished the ice. Just as she laid down
the spoon, she raised her eyes quietly and encountered Wolfenden's. He
looked away at once with an indifference which he felt to be badly
assumed. Did she know, he wondered, that he had been watching her like
an owl all the time? He felt hot and uncomfortable--a veritable
schoolboy at the thought. He plunged into the conversation between
Harcutt and Densham--a conversation which they had been sustaining with
an effort. They too were still as interested in their neighbours,
although their positions at the table made it difficult for either to
observe them closely.

When three men are each thinking intently of something else, it is not
easy to maintain an intelligent discussion. Wolfenden, to create a
diversion, called for the bill. When he had paid it, and they were ready
to depart, Densham looked up with a little burst of candour--

"She's wonderful!" he exclaimed softly.

"Marvellous!" Wolfenden echoed.

"I wonder who on earth they can possibly be," Harcutt said almost
peevishly. Already he was being robbed of some part of his contemplated
satisfaction. It was true that he would probably find the man's name on
the table-list at the door, but he had a sort of presentiment that the
girl's personality would elude him. The question of relationship between
the man and the girl puzzled him. He propounded the problem and they
discussed it with bated breath. There was no likeness at all! Was there
any relationship? It was significant that although Harcutt was a
scandalmonger and Wolfenden somewhat of a cynic, they discussed it with
the most profound respect. Relationship after all of some sort there
must be. What was it? It was Harcutt who alone suggested what to
Wolfenden seemed an abominable possibility.

"Scarcely husband and wife, I should think," he said thoughtfully, "yet
one never can tell!"

Involuntarily they all three glanced towards the man. He was well
preserved and his little imperial and short grey moustache were trimmed
with military precision, yet his hair was almost white, and his
age could scarcely be less than sixty. In his way he was quite as
interesting as the girl. His eyes, underneath his thick brows, were dark
and clear, and his features were strong and delicately shaped. His hands
were white and very shapely, the fingers were rather long, and he wore
two singularly handsome rings, both set with strange stones. By the
side of the table rested the stick upon which he had been leaning during
his passage through the room. It was of smooth, dark wood polished like
a malacca cane, and set at the top with a curious, green, opalescent
stone, as large as a sparrow's egg. The eyes of the three men had each
in turn been arrested by it. In the electric light which fell softly
upon the upper part of it, the stone seemed to burn and glow with a
peculiar, iridescent radiance. Evidently it was a precious possession,
for once when a waiter had offered to remove it to a stand at the other
end of the room, the man had stopped him sharply and drawn it a little
closer towards him.

Wolfenden lit a fresh cigarette, and gazed thoughtfully into the little
cloud of blue smoke.

"Husband and wife," he repeated slowly. "What an absurd idea! More
likely father and daughter!"

"How about the roses?" Harcutt remarked. "A father does not as a rule
show such excellent taste in flowers!"

They had finished supper. Suddenly the girl stretched out her left hand
and took a glove from the table. Wolfenden smiled triumphantly.

"She has no wedding-ring," he exclaimed softly.

Then Harcutt, for the first time, made a remark for which he was never
altogether forgiven--a remark which both the other men received in
chilling silence.

"That may or may not be a matter for congratulation," he said, twirling
his moustache. "One never knows!"

Wolfenden stood up, turning his back upon Harcutt and pointedly ignoring
him.

"Let us go, Densham," he said. "We are almost the last."

As a matter of fact his movement was made at exactly the right time.
They could scarcely have left the room at the same moment as these two
people, in whom manifestly they had been taking so great an interest.
But by the time they had sent for their coats and hats from the
cloak-room, and Harcutt had coolly scrutinised the table-list, they
found themselves all together in a little group at the head of the
stairs.

Wolfenden, who was a few steps in front, drew back to allow them to
pass. The man, leaning upon his stick, laid his hand upon the girl's
sleeve. Then he looked up at the man, and addressed Wolfenden directly.

"You had better precede us, sir," he said; "my progress is unfortunately
somewhat slow."

Wolfenden drew back courteously.

"We are in no hurry," he said. "Please go on."

The man thanked him, and with one hand upon the girl's shoulder and
with the other on his stick commenced to descend. The girl had passed
on without even glancing towards them. She had twisted a white lace
mantilla around her head, and her features were scarcely visible--only
as she passed, Wolfenden received a general impression of rustling white
silk and lace and foaming tulle as she gathered her skirts together at
the head of the stairs. It seemed to him, too, that the somewhat close
atmosphere of the vestibule had become faintly sweet with the delicate
fragrance of the white roses which hung by a loop of satin from her
wrist.

The three men waited until they had reached the bend of the stairs
before they began to descend. Harcutt then leaned forward.

"His name," he whispered, "is disenchanting. It is Mr. Sabin! Whoever
heard of a Mr. Sabin? Yet he looks like a personage!"

At the doors there was some delay. It was raining fast and the
departures were a little congested. The three young men still kept
in the background. Densham affected to be busy lighting a cigarette,
Wolfenden was slowly drawing on his gloves. His place was almost in a
line with the girl's. He could see the diamonds flashing in her fair
hair through the dainty tracery of the drooping white lace, and in a
moment, through some slight change in her position, he could get a
better view of her face than he had been able to obtain even in the
supper-room. She was beautiful! There was no doubt about that! But there
were many beautiful women in London, whom Wolfenden scarcely pretended
to admire. This girl had something better even than supreme beauty.
She was anything but a reproduction. She was a new type. She had
originality. Her hair was dazzlingly fair; her eyebrows, delicately
arched, were high and distinctly dark in colour. Her head was perfectly
shaped--the features seemed to combine a delightful piquancy with a
somewhat statuesque regularity. Wolfenden, wondering of what she in some
manner reminded him, suddenly thought of some old French miniatures,
which he had stopped to admire only a day or two before, in a little
curio shop near Bond Street. There was a distinct dash of something
foreign in her features and carriage. It might have been French, or
Austrian--it was most certainly not Anglo-Saxon!

The crush became a little less, they all moved a step or two
forward--and Wolfenden, glancing carelessly outside, found his attention
immediately arrested. Just as he had been watching the girl, so was a
man, who stood on the pavement side by side with the commissionaire,
watching her companion. He was tall and thin; apparently dressed in
evening clothes, for though his coat was buttoned up to his chin, he
wore an opera hat. His hands were thrust into the loose pockets of his
overcoat, and his face was mostly in the shadows. Once, however, he
followed some motion of Mr. Sabin's and moved his head a little forward.
Wolfenden started and looked at him fixedly. Was it fancy, or was there
indeed something clenched in his right hand there, which gleamed
like silver--or was it steel--in the momentary flash of a passing
carriage-light? Wolfenden was puzzled. There was something, too, which
seemed to him vaguely familiar in the man's figure and person. He was
certainly waiting for somebody, and to judge from his expression his
mission was no pleasant one. Wolfenden who, through the latter part
of the evening, had felt a curious and unwonted sense of excitement
stirring his blood, now felt it go tingling through all his veins. He
had some subtle prescience that he was on the brink of an adventure. He
glanced hurriedly at his two companions; neither of them had noticed
this fresh development.

Just then the commissionaire, who knew Wolfenden by sight, turned round
and saw him standing there. Stepping back on to the pavement, he called
up the brougham, which was waiting a little way down the street.

"Your carriage, my lord," he said to Wolfenden, touching his cap.

Wolfenden, with ready presence of mind, shook his head.

"I am waiting for a friend," he said. "Tell my man to pass on a yard or
two."

The man bowed, and the danger of leaving before these two people, in
whom his interest now was becoming positively feverish, was averted. As
if to enhance it, a singular thing now happened. The interest suddenly
became reciprocal. At the sound of Wolfenden's voice the man with the
club foot had distinctly started. He changed his position and, leaning
forward, looked eagerly at him. His eyes remained for a moment or two
fixed steadily upon him. There was no doubt about the fact, singular in
itself though it was. Wolfenden noticed it himself, so did both Densham
and Harcutt. But before any remark could pass between them a little
_coupe_ brougham had drawn up, and the man and the girl started forward.

Wolfenden followed close behind. The feeling which prompted him to do
so was a curious one, but it seemed to him afterwards that he had even
at that time a conviction that something unusual was about to happen.
The girl stepped lightly across the carpeted way and entered the
carriage. Her companion paused in the doorway to hand some silver to the
commissionaire, then he too, leaning upon his stick, stepped across the
pavement. His foot was already upon the carriage step, when suddenly
what Wolfenden had been vaguely anticipating happened. A dark figure
sprang from out of the shadows and seized him by the throat; something
that glittered like a streak of silver in the electric light flashed
upwards. The blow would certainly have fallen but for Wolfenden. He was
the only person not wholly unprepared for something of the sort, and he
was consequently not paralysed into inaction as were the others. He was
so near, too, that a single step forward enabled him to seize the
uplifted arm in a grasp of iron. The man who had been attacked was the
next to recover himself. Raising his stick he struck at his assailant
violently. The blow missed his head, but grazed his temple and fell upon
his shoulder. The man, released from Wolfenden's grasp by his convulsive
start, went staggering back into the roadway.

There was a rush then to secure him, but it was too late. Wolfenden,
half expecting another attack, had not moved from the carriage door, and
the commissionaire, although a powerful man, was not swift. Like a cat
the man who had made the attack sprang across the roadway, and into the
gardens which fringed the Embankment. The commissionaire and a loiterer
followed him. Just then Wolfenden felt a soft touch on his shoulder. The
girl had opened the carriage door, and was standing at his side.

"Is any one hurt?" she asked quickly.

"No one," he answered. "It is all over. The man has run away."

Mr. Sabin stooped down and brushed away some grey ash from the front of
his coat. Then he took a match-box from his ticket-pocket, and re-lit
the cigarette which had been crumpled in his fingers. His hand was
perfectly steady. The whole affair had scarcely taken thirty seconds.

"It was probably some lunatic," he remarked, motioning to the girl to
resume her place in the carriage. "I am exceedingly obliged to you, sir.
Lord Wolfenden, I believe?" he added, raising his hat. "But for your
intervention the matter might really have been serious. Permit me to
offer you my card. I trust that some day I may have a better opportunity
of expressing my thanks. At present you will excuse me if I hurry. I am
not of your nation, but I share an antipathy with them--I hate a row!"

He stepped into the carriage with a farewell bow, and it drove off at
once. Wolfenden remained looking after it, with his hat in his hand.
From the Embankment below came the faint sound of hurrying footsteps.




CHAPTER III

THE WARNING OF FELIX


The three friends stood upon the pavement watching the little brougham
until it disappeared round the corner in a flickering glitter of light.
It would have been in accordance with precedent if after leaving the
restaurant they had gone to some one of their clubs to smoke a cigar and
drink whisky and apollinaris, while Harcutt retailed the latest society
gossip, and Densham descanted on art, and Wolfenden contributed genial
remarks upon things in general. But to-night all three were inclined to
depart from precedent. Perhaps the surprising incident which they had
just witnessed made anything like normal routine seem unattractive;
whatever the reason may have been, the young men were of a sudden not
in sympathy with one another. Harcutt murmured some conventional lie
about having an engagement, supplemented it with some quite unconvincing
statement about pressure of work, and concluded with an obviously
disingenuous protest against the tyranny of the profession of
journalism, then he sprang with alacrity into a hansom and said goodbye
with a good deal less than his usual cordiality. Densham, too, hailed a
cab, and leaning over the apron delivered himself of a farewell speech
which sounded rather malignant. "You are a lucky beast, Wolfenden," he
growled enviously, adding, with a note of venom in his voice, "but don't
forget it takes more than the first game to win the rubber," and then
he was whirled away, nodding his head and wearing an expression of
wisdom deeply tinged with gloom.

Wolfenden was surprised, but not exactly sorry that the first vague
expression of hostility had been made by the others.

"Both of them must be confoundedly hard hit," he murmured to himself;
"I never knew Densham turn nasty before." And to his coachman he said
aloud, "You may go home, Dawson. I am going to walk."

He turned on to the embankment, conscious of a curious sense of
exhilaration. He was no _blase_ cynic; but the uniformly easy life
tends to become just a trifle monotonous, and Lord Wolfenden's somewhat
epicurean mind derived actual pleasure from the subtle luxury of a new
sensation. What he had said of his friends he could have said with equal
truth of himself: he was confoundedly hard hit. For the first time in
his life he found the mere memory of a woman thrilling; his whole nature
vibrated in response to the appeal she made to him, and he walked along
buoyantly under the stars, revelling in the delight of being alive.

Suddenly he stopped abruptly. Huddled up in the corner of a seat was a
man with a cloth cap pulled forward screening his face: at that moment
Lord Wolfenden was in a mood to be extravagantly generous to any poor
applicant for alms, lavishly sympathetic to any tale of distress. But
it was not ordinary curiosity that arrested his progress now. He
knew almost at the first glance who it was that sat in this dejected
attitude, although the opera hat was replaced by the soft cloth cap, and
in other details the man's appearance was altered. It was indeed the Mr.
Felix who had supped with him at the "Milan" and subsequently behaved in
so astonishing a fashion.

He knew that he was recognised, and sat up, looking steadfastly at
Wolfenden, although his lips trembled and his eyes gleamed wildly.
Across his temples a bright red mark was scored.

Lord Wolfenden broke the silence.

"You're a nice sort of fellow to ask out to supper! What in the name of
all that's wonderful were you trying to do?"

"I should have thought it was sufficiently obvious," the man replied
bitterly. "I tried to kill him, and I failed. Well, why don't you call
the police? I am quite ready. I shall not run again."

Wolfenden hesitated, and then sat down by the side of this surprising
individual.

"The man you went for didn't seem to care, so I don't see why I should.
But why do you want to kill him?"

"To keep a vow," the other answered; "how and why made I will not tell
you."

"How did you escape?" Wolfenden asked abruptly.

"Probably because I didn't care whether I escaped or not," Felix
replied, with a short, bitter laugh. "I stood behind some shrubs just
inside the garden, and watched the hunt go by. Then I came out here and
sat down."

"It all sounds very simple," said Wolfenden, a trifle sarcastically.
"May I ask what you are going to do next?"

Felix's face so clearly intimated that he might not ask anything of the
kind, or that if he did his curiosity would not be satisfied, that
Wolfenden felt compelled to make some apology.

"Forgive me if I seem inquisitive, but I find the situation a little
unusual. You were my guest, you see, and had it not been for my chance
invitation you might not have met that man at all. Then again, had it
not been for my interference he would have been dead now and you would
have been in a fair way to be hanged."

Felix evinced no sign of gratitude for Wolfenden's intervention. Instead
he said intensely,

"Oh, you fool! you fool!"

"Well, really," Wolfenden protested, "I don't see why----" But Felix
interrupted him.

"Yes, you are a fool," he repeated, "because you saved his life. He is
an old man now. I wonder how many there have been in the course of his
long life who desired to kill him? But no one--not one solitary human
being--has ever befriended him or come to his rescue in time of danger
without living to be sorry for it. And so it will be with you. You will
live to be sorry for what you have done to-night; you will live to
think it would have been far better for him to fall by my hand than for
yourself to suffer at his. And you will wish passionately that you had
let him die. Before heaven, Wolfenden, I swear that that is true."

The man was so much in earnest, his passion was so quietly intense, that
Wolfenden against his will was more than half convinced. He was silent.
He suddenly felt cold, and the buoyant elation of mind in which he had
started homewards vanished, leaving him anxious and heavy, perhaps just
a little afraid.

"I did what any man would do for any one else," he said, almost
apologetically. "It was instinctive. As a matter of fact, that
particular man is a perfect stranger to me. I have never seen him
before and it is quite possible that I shall never see him again."

Felix turned quickly towards him.

"If you believe in prayer," he said, "go down on your knees where you
are and pray as you have never prayed for anything before that you may
not see him again. There has never been a man or a woman yet who has not
been the worse for knowing him. He is like the pestilence that walketh
in the darkness, poisoning every one that is in the way of his horrible
infection."

Wolfenden pulled himself together. There was no doubt about his
companion's earnestness, but it was the earnestness of an unbalanced
mind. Language so exaggerated as his was out of keeping with the times
and the place.

"Tell me some more about him," he suggested. "Who is he?"

"I won't tell you," Felix answered, obstinately.

"Well, then, who is the lady?"

"I don't know. It is quite enough for me to know that she is his
companion for the moment."

"You do not intend to be communicative, I can see," said Wolfenden,
after a brief pause, "but I wish I could persuade you to tell me why you
attempted his life to-night."

"There was the opportunity," said Felix, as if that in itself were
sufficient explanation. Then he smiled enigmatically. "There are at
least three distinct and separate reasons why I should take his
life,--all of them good. Three, I mean, why I should do it. But I have
not been his only victim. There are plenty of others who have a heavy
reckoning against him, and he knows what it is to carry his life in his
hand. But he bears a charmed existence. Did you see his stick?"

"Yes," said Wolfenden, "I did. It had a peculiar stone in the handle; in
the electric light it looked like a huge green opal."

Felix assented moodily.

"That is it. He struck me with a stick. He would not part with it for
anything. It was given him by some Indian fakir, and it is said that
while he carries it he is proof against attack."

"Who says so?" Wolfenden inquired.

"Never mind," said Felix. "It's enough that it is said." He relapsed
into silence, and when he next spoke his manner was different. His
excited vehemence had gone and there was nothing in his voice or
demeanour inconsistent with normal sanity. Yet his words were no less
charged with deep intention. "I do not know much about you, Lord
Wolfenden," he said; "but I beg you to take the advice I am offering
you. No one ever gave you better in your life. Avoid that man as you
would avoid the plague. Go away before he looks you up to thank you for
what you did. Go abroad, anywhere; the farther the better; and stay away
for ever, if that is the only means of escaping his friendship or even
his acquaintance."

Lord Wolfenden shook his head.

"I'm a very ordinary, matter of fact Englishman," he said, "leading
a very ordinary, matter of fact life, and you must forgive me if I
consider such a sweeping condemnation a little extravagant and
fantastic. I have no particular enemies on my conscience, I am
implicated in no conspiracy, and I am, in short, an individual of very
little importance. Consequently I have nothing to fear from anybody and
am afraid of nobody. This man cannot have anything to gain by injuring
me. I believe you said you did not know the lady?"

"The lady?" Felix repeated. "No, I do not know her, nor anything of her
beyond the fact that she is with him for the time being. That is quite
sufficient for me."

Wolfenden got up.

"Thanks," he said lazily. "I only asked you for facts. As for your
suggestion--you will be well advised not to repeat it."

"Oh!" exclaimed Felix, scornfully, "how blind and pig-headed you English
people are! I have told you something of the man's reputation. What can
hers be, do you suppose, if she will sup alone with him in a public
restaurant?"

"Good-night," said Wolfenden. "I will not listen to another word."

Felix rose to his feet and laid his hand upon Lord Wolfenden's arm.

"Lord Wolfenden," he said, "you are a very decent fellow: do try to
believe that I am only speaking for your good. That girl----"

Wolfenden shook him off.

"If you allude to that young lady, either directly or indirectly," he
said very calmly, "I shall throw you into the river."

Felix shrugged his shoulders.

"At least remember that I warned you," was all he ventured to say as
Lord Wolfenden strode away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leaving the embankment Wolfenden walked quickly to Half Moon Street,
where his chambers were. His servant let him in and took his coat. There
was an anxious expression upon his usually passive face and he appeared
to be rather at a loss for words in which to communicate his news. At
last he got it out, accompanying the question with a nervous and
deprecating cough.

"I beg your pardon, my lord, but were you expecting a young lady?"

"A what, Selby?" Wolfenden exclaimed, looking at him in amazement.

"A lady, my lord: a young lady."

"Of course not," said Wolfenden, with a frown. "What on earth do you
mean?"

Selby gathered courage.

"A young lady called here about an hour ago, and asked for you. Johnson
informed her that you might be home shortly, and she said she would
wait. Johnson, perhaps imprudently, admitted her, and she is in the
study, my lord."

"A young lady in my study at this time of night!" Wolfenden exclaimed,
incredulously. "Who is she, and what is she, and why has she come at
all? Have you gone mad, Selby?"

"Then you were not expecting her?" the man said, anxiously. "She gave no
name, but she assured Johnson that you did."

"You are a couple of idiots," Wolfenden said angrily. "Of course I
wasn't expecting her. Surely both you and Johnson have been in my
service long enough to know me better than that."

"I am exceedingly sorry, my lord," the man said abjectly. "But the young
lady's appearance misled us both. If you will allow me to say so, my
lord, I am quite sure that she is a lady. No doubt there is some
mistake; but when you see her I think you will exonerate Johnson and me
from----"

His master cut his protestations short.

"Wait where you are until I ring," he said. "It never entered my head
that you could be such an incredible idiot."

He strode into the study, closing the door behind him, and Selby
obediently waited for the bell. But a long time passed before the
summons came.




CHAPTER IV

AT THE RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR'S


The brougham containing the man who had figured in the "Milan" table
list as Mr. Sabin, and his companion, turned into the Strand and
proceeded westwards. Close behind it came Harcutt's private cab--only
a few yards away followed Densham's hansom. The procession continued
in the same order, skirting Trafalgar Square and along Pall Mall.

Each in a different manner, the three men were perhaps equally
interested in these people. Geoffrey Densham was attracted as an artist
by the extreme and rare beauty of the girl. Wolfenden's interest was
at once more sentimental and more personal. Harcutt's arose partly out
of curiosity, partly from innate love of adventure. Both Densham and
Harcutt were exceedingly interested as to their probable destination.
From it they would be able to gather some idea as to the status and
social position of Mr. Sabin and his companion. Both were perhaps a
little surprised when the brougham, which had been making its way into
the heart of fashionable London, turned into Belgrave Square and pulled
up before a great, porticoed house, brilliantly lit, and with a crimson
drugget and covered way stretched out across the pavement. Harcutt
sprang out first, just in time to see the two pass through the opened
doorway, the man leaning heavily upon his stick, the girl, with her
daintily gloved fingers just resting upon his coat-sleeve, walking with
that uncommon and graceful self-possession which had so attracted
Densham during her passage through the supper-room at the "Milan" a
short while ago.

Harcutt looked after them, watching them disappear with a frown upon his
forehead.

"Rather a sell, isn't it?" said a quiet voice in his ear.

He turned abruptly round. Densham was standing upon the pavement by his
side.

"Great Scott!" he exclaimed testily. "What are you doing here?"

Densham threw away his cigarette and laughed.

"I might return the question, I suppose," he remarked. "We both followed
the young lady and her imaginary papa! We were both anxious to find out
where they lived--and we are both sold!"

"Very badly sold," Harcutt admitted. "What do you propose to do now? We
can't wait outside here for an hour or two!"

Densham hesitated.

"No, we can't do that," he said. "Have you any plan?"

Harcutt shook his head.

"Can't say that I have."

They were both silent for a moment. Densham was smiling softly to
himself. Watching him, Harcutt became quite assured that he had decided
what to do.

"Let us consider the matter together," he suggested, diplomatically. "We
ought to be able to hit upon something."

Densham shook his head doubtfully.

"No," he said; "I don't think that we can run this thing in double
harness. You see our interests are materially opposed."

Harcutt did not see it in the same light.

"Pooh! We can travel together by the same road," he protested. "The
time to part company has not come yet. Wolfenden has got a bit ahead of
us to-night. After all, though, you and I may pull level, if we help one
another. You have a plan, I can see! What is it?"

Densham was silent for a moment.

"You know whose house this is?" he asked.

Harcutt nodded.

"Of course! It's the Russian Ambassador's!"

Densham drew a square card from his pocket, and held it out under the
gas-light. From it, it appeared that the Princess Lobenski desired the
honour of his company at any time that evening between twelve and two.

"A card for to-night, by Jove!" Harcutt exclaimed.

Densham nodded, and replaced it in his pocket.

"You see, Harcutt," he said, "I am bound to take an advantage over you!
I only got this card by an accident, and I certainly do not know the
Princess well enough to present you. I shall be compelled to leave you
here! All that I can promise is, that if I discover anything interesting
I will let you know about it to-morrow. Good-night!"

Harcutt watched him disappear through the open doors, and then walked
a little way along the pavement, swearing softly to himself. His first
idea was to wait about until they came out, and then follow them again.
By that means he would at least be sure of their address. He would have
gained something for his time and trouble. He lit a cigarette, and
walked slowly to the corner of the street. Then he turned back and
retraced his steps. As he neared the crimson strip of drugget, one of
the servants drew respectfully aside, as though expecting him to enter.
The man's action was like an inspiration to him. He glanced down the
vista of covered roof. A crowd of people were making their way up the
broad staircase, and amongst them Densham. After all, why not? He
laughed softly to himself and hesitated no longer. He threw away his
cigarette and walked boldly in. He was doing a thing for which he well
knew that he deserved to be kicked. At the same time, he had made up
his mind to go through with it, and he was not the man to fail through
nervousness or want of _savoir faire_.

At the cloak-room the multitude of men inspired him with new confidence.
There were some, a very fair sprinkling, whom he knew, and who greeted
him indifferently, without appearing in any way to regard his presence
as a thing out of the common. He walked up the staircase, one of a
little group; but as they passed through the ante-room to where in the
distance Prince and Princess Lobenski were standing to receive their
guests, Harcutt adroitly disengaged himself--he affected to pause for a
moment or two to speak to an acquaintance. When he was left alone, he
turned sharp to the right and entered the main dancing-salon.

He was quite safe now, and his spirits began to rise. Yonder was
Densham, looking very bored, dancing with a girl in yellow. So far at
least he had gained no advantage. He looked everywhere in vain, however,
for a man with a club foot and the girl in white and diamonds. They must
be in one of the inner rooms. He began to make a little tour.

Two of the ante-chambers he explored without result. In the third, two
men were standing near the entrance, talking. Harcutt almost held his
breath as he came to an abrupt stop within a yard or two of them. One
was the man for whom he had been looking, the other--Harcutt seemed
to find his face perfectly familiar, but for the moment he could not
identify him. He was tall, with white hair and moustaches. His coat was
covered with foreign orders, and he wore English court dress. His hands
were clasped behind his back; he was talking in a low, clear tone,
stooping a little, and with eyes steadfastly fixed upon his companion.
Mr. Sabin was leaning a little forward, with both hands resting upon
his stick. Harcutt was struck at once with the singular immobility of
his face. He did not appear either interested or amused or acquiescent.
He was simply listening. A few words from the other man came to
Harcutt's ears, as he lingered there on the other side of the curtain.

"If it were money--a question of monetary recompense--the secret service
purse of my country opens easily, and it is well filled. If it were
anything less simple, the proposal could but be made. I am taking the
thing, you understand, at your own computation of its worth! I am taking
it for granted that it carries with it the power you claim for it.
Assuming these things, I am prepared to treat with you. I am going on
leave very shortly, and I could myself conduct the negotiations."

Harcutt would have moved away, but he was absolutely powerless.
Naturally, and from his journalistic instincts, he was one of the most
curious of men. He had recognised the speaker. The interview was
pregnant with possibilities. Who was this Mr. Sabin, that so great a man
should talk with him so earnestly? He was looking up now, he was going
to speak. What was he going to say? Harcutt held his breath. The idea of
moving away never occurred to him now.

"Yet," Mr. Sabin said slowly, "your country should be a low bidder. The
importance of such a thing to you must be less than to France, less than
to her great ally. Your relations here are close and friendly. Nature
and destiny seemed to have made you allies. As y