# Fama Fraternitatis (Rosicrucian Manifesto)
Author: Anónimo
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #19251
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:19:59.251739
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Arohanui: Letters from Shoghi Effendi to New Zealand


by Shoghi Effendi




Edition 1, (September 2006)





                           BAHA’I TERMS OF USE


You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
following:

1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to the
Content;

2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to change
the font or appearance;

3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.

Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given freely
such that no special permission is required, the Bahá’í International
Community retains full copyright protection for all Content included at
this Site under all applicable national and international laws.

For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the Content
for any commercial purpose, please contact us
(http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).





                                 CONTENTS


Baha’i Terms of Use
Part I
Letters to Individuals, before April 21st, 1926.
   (1) June 22nd, 1923
   (2) May 8th, 1925
   (3) May 9th, 1925
   (4) May 21st, 1925
   (5) May 28th, 1925
   (6) November 4th, 1925
   (7) December 5th, 1925
   (8) March 4th, 1926
   (9) April 3rd, 1926
Part II
Letters to Individuals, April 21st, 1926--April 21st, 1934.
   (10) August 12th, 1926
   (11) August 12th, 1926
   (12) August 25th, 1926
   (13) September 18th, 1926
   (14) October 23rd, 1926
   (15) November 3rd, 1926
   (16) January 11th, 1927
   (17) January 30th, 1927
   (18) May 13th, 1927
   (19) June 4th, 1929
   (20) October 4th, 1930
   (21) May 18th, 1931
   (22) December 17th, 1931
   (23) April 29th, 1933
   (24) September 1st, 1933
Part III
Letters to Individuals, May 1934–1957.
   (25) June 13th, 1934
   (26) December 22nd, 1934
   (27) January 21st, 1935
   (28) February 5th, 1935
   (29) May 20th, 1936
   (30) September 30th, 1936
   (31) December 7th, 1936
   (32) November 8th, 1937
   (33) May 17th, 1938
   (34) December 20th, 1938
   (35) March 20th, 1939
   (36) August 3rd, 1941
   (37) December 19th, 1947
   (38) November 23rd, 1949
   (39) December 18th, 1949
   (40) June 11th, 1952
   (41) January 6th, 1955
Part IV
Letters to Bahá’í Institutions.
   (42) March 31st, 1926
   (43) May 14th, 1926
   (44) January 7th, 1935
   (45) September 26th, 1935
   (46) April 26th, 1936
   (47) June 10th, 1936
   (48) November 17th, 1936
   (49) January 31st, 1938
   (50) November 2nd, 1938
   (51) March 22nd, 1939
   (52) April 19th, 1941
   (53) April 25th, 1941
   (54) April 18th, 1942
   (55) May 12th, 1944
   (56) December 18th, 1949
   (57) June 28th, 1950
   (58) November 1st, 1950
   (59) March 1st, 1951
   (60) June 16th, 1954
   (61) July 24, 1955
   (62) June 13th, 1956
   (63) September 5th, 1956
   (64) April 4th, 1957
   (65) May 20th, 1957
   (66) June 27th, 1957
   (67) July 19th, 1957
   (68) August 30th, 1957
   (69) September 9th, 1957
Part V
Telegrams to New Zealand.
   (70) January 22nd, 1949
   (71) December 29th, 1949
   (72) December 29th, 1949
   (73) December 30th, 1953
Part VI
Statements on Various Subjects.
   ALCOHOL (74)
   EVOLUTION (75)
   “HERALD OF THE SOUTH”--(76)
   “HERALD OF THE SOUTH”--(77)
   “HERALD OF THE SOUTH”--(78)
   “HERALD OF THE SOUTH”--(79)
   PHILOSOPHERS (80)
   SCOUTING (81)
   SOUL, MIND AND SPIRIT (82)
Appendix: Notes
   Note 1. (Letter No. 1)
   Note 2. (Letter No. 1)
   Note 3. (Letter No. 2)
   Note 4. (Letter No. 2)
   Note 5. (Letter No. 15)
   Note 6. (Letter No. 16)
   Note 7. (Letter No. 16)
   Note 8. (Letter No. 23)
   Note 9. (Letter No. 33)
   Note 10. (Letter No. 37)
   Individual Addressees
   Institution Addressees






Dedicated to the memory of Shoghi Effendi in commemoration of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the formation of the National Spiritual
Assembly of the Bahá’ís of New Zealand.





“AROHANUI”


The word “Arohanui” is a Maori word and, as with many Polynesian words,
there is no direct translation into English. The literal meaning is “big
love”, or “much love” or “great love”. And, like most words in most
languages, it has several meanings. In naming this book, “Arohanui:
Letters from Shoghi Effendi to New Zealand”, “Arohanui” is used in its
more expressive meaning, “enfolding love”, or “that love which binds a
community together”, or “that love which creates bonds of mutual trust and
loyalty”, or “that love which builds and carries forward culture or
civilization”.





Arohanui: Letters from Shoghi Effendi to New Zealand

Bahá’í publishing trust
Suva, Fiji
Approved for publication by the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís
of New Zealand Inc.
(c) 1982 BAHÁ’Í PUBLISHING TRUST SUVA, FIJI ISLANDS





    “You are destined to achieve great things for our beloved Cause
    and my constant prayer is that your vision may be clear, your
    purpose unshaken, your zeal undiminished, your hopes undimmed. Let
    not obstacles and disappointments, which are inevitable,
    dishearten you and whenever you are faced with trials recall our
    Beloved’s innumerable sufferings.”


    From a letter to the first New Zealand Bahá’í dated August 12th, 1926.

The letters in this compilation were written by various secretaries of the
Guardian at his specific direction. Spelling and other inconsistencies are
a reflection of the fact that different secretaries were used. Those
passages actually written by the Guardian himself are printed in italics.

The messages are numbered sequentially for the convenience of the reader
and as an aid to indexing. The numbers appear before the date of each
letter.





PART I
LETTERS TO INDIVIDUALS, BEFORE APRIL 21ST, 1926.


These were written prior to the formation of the first Local Spiritual
Assembly in New Zealand.




(1) June 22nd, 1923


My dear Bahá’í sister,

Your beautiful letter of April 3rd written to the Beloved Guardian of the
Cause of God, our dear Shoghi Effendi, was received.[+E1] He was much
impressed and charmed with the spirit of your letter, which indicated deep
devotion to and absolute dependence on the Holy Spirit of the Beloved
Master, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.

He instructed me with a heart overflowing with love to answer your letter,
conveying to you his high estimation for the beauty of the faith of the
New Zealand friends, and deep appreciation towards the splendid services
of our dear Mr and Mrs Dunn,[+E2] who are so wonderfully blessed and
assisted by the power of the Holy Ghost. He loves you all and prays for
your happiness and spiritual growth.

It is true that your group is now still small, but he assures you that
your group will before long grow larger and larger day by day. It has been
always the case with the growth of every religion. Some pure soul or souls
go to some land and sow the seeds of the heavenly teachings in the hearts
of few who are most pure and so most receptive. The seeds will germinate
and grow in them. The fruits of these seeds appear in the regeneration of
the lives of these primary adherents. These primary adherents share the
bounties they have received with other souls, who through them obtain new
life and light and in turn illumine other people.

The primary adherents are the stars of great magnitude in every land in
the firmament of the Kingdom of God. They are the chosen people. They are
like candles which, through their sacrificial efforts, are weeping their
lives away in order to give light to the world and establish the purpose
of their Lord and Saviour, which purpose is the salvation of mankind. His
Holiness, Jesus Christ! see how small the group of His disciples was! No
matter how few the number of the disciples was, yet they through His power
illumined the world. Our Era is similar to that, but through the
development of humanity it is greater, and through the evils of the
material civilization and negligence of mankind our sacrifices must be
greater. Divine light must make itself manifest in our daily life deeds.

In the early days of the appearance of our Saviour, virtue was to save
ourselves. When we are once established in our faith, then virtue is to
save others. The three mottoes of education hold true in our case too.
First grow, then become and then contribute. We have developed; we have
established ourselves, and now it is time to contribute to others. We have
inexhaustible capital. The candles of our spiritual lives constantly weep
away their lives in shedding light to the world, but they never become
exhausted. For there is connection between our lives and that of
Bahá’u’lláh and our beloved ‘Abdu’l-Bahá.

It cannot be described how much we long to see our dear New Zealand
brethren and sisters. We hope the day will come when they can come to us
and we to them. Meanwhile, we are praying at the Holy Threshold of our
beloved Master for your success and happiness. We hope you will pray for
us too. The effect of the prayers of the pure hearts is tremendously
great.

Our dear Shoghi Effendi wants you not to look at your own capacity, but at
the power of the Holy Ghost of God. He sends you all his loving greeting
and tender affection.

With warm wishes and Bahá’í love, I remain,

Your humble brother in His love,
Azizullah S. Bahadur




(2) May 8th, 1925


Alláh-u-abhá

Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Shoghi Effendi was very pleased to receive this morning your letter of
28th April, but we were very sorry to hear you have been ill and hope your
health will soon be completely restored.[+E3] It was nice that you saw
Shoghi’s sister and Soheil’s brother in London.

I forget whether I gave you the address of Mr and Mrs King, c/o Messrs
Hayman and King, 202 Old Christchurch Rd. Bournemouth. They are very
kind-hearted Bahá’ís and will be delighted to see any of you if you call.
Both of them work in the business and you are most likely to see them if
you call there. They live above the shop.

I gave you Sister Challis’s address at West Moors (Ferndown Lodge). You
can get there by ’bus from Bournemouth Sq. or Lansdowne, which will drop
you right at Sister Challis’s door (She keeps a nursing home) or you can
go by train from West Bournemouth to West Moors station which is within 5
minutes’ walk of Ferndown Lodge. I hope you will be able to see her.

As I write, the Greatest Holy Leaf is on a visit to the Shrine of the
Master. It is over a year, I think, since she has been able to visit the
shrine and until now she has not seen the new Gardens, in the laying out
of which Shoghi Effendi has taken such a deep interest. The Gardens are
looking lovely now and it is easy to imagine how delighted she will be.
One day during the feast of Ridván she and the Holy Mother were able to
visit Bahjí and the Garden of Ridván.

I have quite recovered from my pleurisy now and am steadily regaining my
strength.

Shoghi Effendi is still tired. I hope he will soon be able to take a rest.

All the friends here join in loving greetings and best wishes to yourself,
your son and daughter, Miss Stevenson and Effie Baker.[+E4] With warmest
greetings.

Your brother in the service of the Beloved,
J. E. Esslemont

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear precious sister in ‘Abdu’l-Bahá:_

_I was so glad to hear from you directly and learn of your improved health
and meeting with the English Bahá’ís. I need not assure you of my ardent
prayers for your happiness, good health and continued success in the
service of the Cause. I hope and pray you will be enabled by the guiding
spirit of the Master not only to stimulate the interest of your friends
and relations in this Cause but to make of some of them earnest and
whole-hearted believers and supporters of the Faith._

_Shoghi_




(3) May 9th, 1925


Alláh-u-abhá

Dear Bahá’í Sister,

The Greatest Holy Leaf and Shoghi Effendi have asked me to answer on their
behalf your kind letters of Apr. 2nd from Port Said and April 14th from
London.

We were sorry to hear that Mrs Blundell got a chill on the steamer and was
laid up for a few days after her arrival in London. We hope that by this
time she is all right again. We had a note from her from Bournemouth.

You will be glad to hear that the Greatest Holy Leaf and the Holy Mother
were able to motor to Bahjí and Ridván one day during the Feast of Ridván,
and that yesterday the Greatest Holy Leaf motored to the Shrine of
‘Abdu’l-Bahá and saw the new Gardens in which Shoghi Effendi has been
taking so much interest.

Yesterday a Dutchman arrived here from Port Said, the first Dutch Bahá’í,
so far as we know. He has been a sincere and earnest truth-seeker for
years. About 9 months ago he left his home at the Hague and walked on foot
through Belgium, France and Italy. Then he felt some inward urge to go to
Egypt, and travelled thither by a Dutch Cargo Steamer. When the steamer
arrived at Port Said Mahmood Effendi, one of the Port Said Bahá’ís came on
board and was introduced to Mesdag (the Dutchman). They struck up a
friendship at once and after 2 days Mesdag went to live in Mahmood’s
house. There he met Martha Root, Mr Schopflocher and various other
Bahá’ís, read my book and became thoroughly interested and seems now
already a firm believer. He has already, since his arrival yesterday
morning, translated our 8-page folder into Dutch and we hope he will be
able to do much to make the Cause known in Holland and win adherents
there.

I have quite recovered from my pleurisy now and am feeling almost as
vigorous as before the attack. Azizullah Bahadur is now in Stuttgart.
There is as yet no improvement in his hand, but he is having skilled
treatment now and we hope it will be successful. He seems to be having a
very happy time with the German friends.

Shoghi Effendi is much in need of rest, but fairly well. He and all the
members of the Holy Family join in loving greetings and heartfelt prayers
for your welfare. We hope you will have a fine time in England and return
to New Zealand refreshed and reinvigorated physically and spiritually to
take up your work for the Kingdom there with new enthusiasm and devotion.
We pray that you may always be guided and strengthened by the Divine
Confirmations.

With love also to Effie Baker and all the other friends,

Your brother in the service of the Beloved,
J. E. Esslemont

[From the Guardian:]

_My precious Bahá’í sister:--_

_I wish to assure you personally of my appreciation of your devotion to
the Cause, and your earnest efforts to promote it as well as my fervent
prayers for your spiritual advancement, success and happiness. I will
always remember you most tenderly in my hours of visit at the three holy
Shrines and beseech for you and the New Zealand friends the blessings of
our loving and almighty Master._

_You true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(4) May 21st, 1925


Alláh-u-abhá

Dear Bahá’í Brother,

Shoghi Effendi has asked me to reply to your kind letter of 11th April. He
is delighted to hear that you propose starting a Bahá’í Magazine for
Australia and New Zealand and suggests as a suitable title “The Herald of
the South”. Every 19 days a letter will be sent from Haifa to Mr and Mrs
Hyde Dunn giving the news of the Cause. Owing to the restricted facilities
for multiplying copies which are at present available here, I fear it will
not be possible to send another copy to you, but doubtless you can arrange
with Mr and Mrs Hyde Dunn to have their copy passed on to you for the
magazine. We are glad to hear that notwithstanding the absence of the
Blundells and Margaret Stevenson, the friends in New Zealand are remaining
united and active. We hope that when the pilgrims return the faith and
enthusiasm of the believers will be greatly deepened and strengthened and
that many new believers may be attracted. I had a long letter from Effie
Baker yesterday. She is very devoted and whole-hearted and will be a
valuable worker for the Cause, I think, and a great help to Father and
Mother Dunn. When she wrote, Margaret Stevenson had gone to Scotland and
Mrs and Miss Blundell were in Bournemouth. Effie Baker hopes to make a
return visit to Haifa on her way back to Australia.

Shoghi Effendi assures you of his prayers on behalf of your mother,
yourself and all the Australasian friends and his hopes that the proposed
Magazine may greatly help the spread of the Glad Tidings in Australia and
New Zealand.

With warmest greetings and best wishes,

Yours sincerely in the Master’s service,
J. E. Esslemont

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear fellow-worker:_

_Your charming letter truly gladdened my heart. I will follow the
development of your magazine with keen interest and assure you of my
desire to help and promote its interests to the fullest possible extent. I
am enclosing the photographs of the shrine and gardens recently laid out
in the close neighbourhood of the Shrines of the Báb and ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. I
assure you of my love, appreciation and fervent prayers._

_Yours, _
_ Shoghi_




(5) May 28th, 1925


Alláh-u-abhá.

Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Shoghi Effendi asks me to thank you on his behalf for your letter of 14th
May. He received the letter of Mrs. Amy Thornton all right. I remember
answering it for him some weeks ago, so you can set your mind at rest on
that score.

The recovery of your Bahá’í ring and stones was very remarkable. It
reminds me of a somewhat similar occurrence in Bournemouth. One of our
Bahá’í friends had her Bahá’í ring stolen, and nothing was heard or seen
of it for some months. Mr King, another of our group, has an antique shop
in Bournemouth and one day his partner (a non-Bahá’í) bought a ring from a
man who said it was his wife’s, but as they had become very badly off she
wanted to sell it. When Mr King saw the ring he recognized it as a Bahá’í
ring and knowing that this friend had lost her ring, he sent it to me. It
turned out to be her ring and she was delighted to recover it. The curious
thing is that out of the dozens of jewellers and antique shops in
Bournemouth to which the ring might have been taken for sale, it should be
taken to the one where there was a Bahá’í who recognized it.

I hope that before you leave Scotland you may be able to go to Aberdeen
and see my home people. They would be delighted to see you. My father’s
address is Fairford, Cults, (about 3 miles from Aberdeen, by car or
train). He is 86 years of age and rather frail. My sister looks after him.
My two married brothers are Peter Esslemont, 21, Louisville Avenue
(Business: John E. Esslemont, 16 King Street) and W.D.E., 12 Wellbrae
Terr., Mannofield. Both of their houses are near the Mannofield Car Line.

We were very glad to hear of your meetings with the friends at London and
West Moors.

Many thanks for your letter to myself and the excellent snap-shots
enclosed. I am glad you have fallen in love with Sister Challis and hope
you will see her again before you leave. I had a delightful letter
yesterday from Miss Kilford of West Moors, whom I regard as a Bahá’í
grand-daughter, as she was brought into the Cause by Sister Challis who
calls me her Bahá’í father!

We hope Shoghi Effendi will get away soon for a much needed rest. The
Greatest Holy Leaf was rather seriously ill last week, but is a good deal
better again, although very feeble and frail.

I have been advised by the Drs to leave Haifa for the summer months, as my
breathing has lately been troublesome and they think the moist heat during
the summer here would be bad for me. On the same day on which this
decision was arrived at, I received a cordial invitation to go to a place
in the Black Forest for my summer vacation. The Drs considered this place
would be ideal for me and that the sooner I got away the better, so I
leave in 3 days time. My address will be c/o Frau Victoria von Sigsfeld,
Husli, Finsterlingen, bei St Blaisien, Baden, Germany. I hope to return to
Haifa in the latter part of Sept. to resume my work here.

Shoghi Effendi, the members of the Holy Household and the friends here
join in loving greetings and best wishes.

Your brother in the service of the Beloved,
J. E. Esslemont

Mrs Schopflocher arrived here last night after a very successful tour in
Russia, Persia and Iraq.

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear co-worker:_

_I was very glad indeed to learn about your experiences and visit to the
friends and your firm determination to labour unceasingly in the Divine
Vineyard. I will continue to pray for you that all your relatives and
friends may recognise and be illumined with the resplendent Light of this
Divine Revelation. Never feel disheartened and trust me ever your
affectionate, grateful and true brother in the service of the Cause._

_Shoghi_




(6) November 4th, 1925


Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Shoghi Effendi received your kind letter and wishes me to acknowledge its
receipt. He hopes that on your return to New Zealand you will obtain
divine assistance in your services to the Cause. That land has been newly
opened to the Bahá’í Movement. The work of the friends therefore,
interesting and useful as it may be, is hard and most exacting to one’s
patience and energy. It needs great perseverance to obtain a hearing among
the people and draw their attention to this Blessed Cause. But once that
that has been obtained and the way smoothed then progress becomes
increasingly great and the fruits of your labours appreciated.

Shoghi Effendi is very glad that you have enjoyed your trip to England.
The Friends there though they are few in number, are full of love and
affection, one cannot but feel at home among them.

Shoghi Effendi thanks Miss Nora Lee for the kind contribution she has made
to the Cause. It will be spent for the progress of this movement so dear
to the heart of us all. Enclosed there will be a receipt for that amount.

Shoghi Effendi and the other members of the family send you their best
Bahá’í love and greeting and wish you success in your services to the
Cause.

Your brother in His Name,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dearest fellow-worker:_

_My prayers accompany you wherever you go. I wish you to be happy,
confident and active. Rest assured of my great admiration of your zeal and
steadfast labours, of my confidence in the success of your splendid
pioneer services and of my eagerness to hear from you about the progress
of your work._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(7) December 5th, 1925


_To the publisher of the Bahá’í Magazine, “The Herald of the South”._

_My dear friend and fellow-worker:_

_I have just heard the welcome news of the publication of the first issue
of the Bahá’í Journal, recently established by the friends of Australia
and New Zealand. I rejoice in this new and notable Bahá’í enterprise,
particularly as it is undertaken by my dearly-beloved and self-sacrificing
brothers and sisters in a land which holds so great a promise for the
future._

_I have followed the progress of the activities of the Bahá’ís of
Australia and New Zealand with keen interest and ever-increasing
confidence, and with a deep sense of pride and gratitude. I most heartily
welcome this newly-added link in the chain of the many services, so
lovingly and spontaneously rendered by the pioneers of the Cause in these
lands. I assure you of my steadfast prayers for the speedy expansion and
consolidation of this youngest of all Bahá’í Magazines, and of my earnest
endeavours to enable it attain a standard worthy of the bearer of such a
noble Message._

_It should be the object and purpose of its author and publisher to open
its pages to the consideration and review of matters that are strictly
Bahá’í in character, as well as to the treatment of topics of a
humanitarian, ethical and religious nature; that its readers, while
witnessing to the liberal and broad-minded attitude of the Bahá’í Cause,
may receive from it their full share of inspiration which only a clear and
direct statement of the Divine Message can impart._

_Go forth, on thy noble errand, O thou Herald of the South! Join thy
voice, however feeble, to those of thy sister-journals who, in various
parts of the world, are raising with one accord the call of this new Day
of God. Persevere in thy labours, endeavour to reach every circle and
every home, that the light thou bearest may in the fulness of time
illuminate with its healing rays the uttermost corners of that distant and
troubled continent._

_Your well-wisher, _
_ Shoghi_




(8) March 4th, 1926


Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Your letter to Shoghi Effendi and the enclosed one to Ruhi with the postal
order for £10 have been received and read with keen interest and pleasure.

We are all very happy to know that you have had such a pleasant journey
back home and that you had the opportunity of delivering the message on so
many occasions. We hope and pray that the seed you have sown has fallen on
fertile soil and that in time it will grow and bear abundant fruit.

We hope that now through your sustained zeal and effort new life will be
infused into your small Bahá’í group, and that it will in the near future
grow sufficiently in number to enable you to form an assembly the first to
be established in that land. We shall pray at the Holy Threshold for your
guidance and the success of your work.

The Greatest Holy Leaf and the Holy Mother remember you well, and they and
the other members of the family send their loving greetings to you.

You will be interested to know that the new pilgrim house is being
completed, and it will be all ready in a month time for the new pilgrims
that will come.

We still have our dear sister Effie Baker with us, and we all love her so;
she is so sweet and helpful.

We have just now two American lady friends with us, Auntie Victoria
Bedekian and Mrs R. Kehler--very fine Bahá’ís they are and we are
expecting some more soon.

I always remember the happy day I spent with you and Effy in London and
shall look forward to the pleasure of meeting you again some day--perhaps
here in Haifa or in New Zealand, who knows?

I am back at home now for the present, and I am trying to help Shoghi
Effendi a little in his enormous task.

He is keeping in good health I am glad to say in spite of his many
activities and heavy and manifold responsibilities.

To you he sends his brotherly love and the assurance of his prayers for
your welfare and happiness.

With all good wishes and loving greetings,

Your sister in His Service,
Ruh-Anguiz Rabbani

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear and precious Bahá’í sister:_

_I cannot but add a few words personally expressing my deep appreciation
of your persistent, self-sacrificing services to the Cause. I have devoted
your gift towards the Fund for the Western Pilgrim House and I wish to
assure you that when I visit the Holy Shrines I tenderly supplicate for
you Divine Guidance and strength in your labours for our beloved Cause._

_Your true Brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(9) April 3rd, 1926


Dear Spiritual Sister:--

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
January 24, 1926.

He hopes that after this long vacation you have had you are ready to begin
spreading the Cause in New Zealand with even greater energy than before.
The people there seem to be broad in their outlook, receptive to any idea
which helps the human family from decreasing its burden.

Shoghi Effendi was most chagrined to hear of the sudden death of your
son(1) and wishes me to extend to you his deepest love and sympathy.

There is no special news here except that we have removed to the new
pilgrim house. Miss Baker is well and very busy entertaining the friends
and arranging the new home.

Shoghi Effendi as well as the other members of the family are well and
send you their love and greetings. They earnestly pray for your success
and hope to hear, before long, the news of your many victories in the
field of services to the Cause.

Please convey my loving greetings to your son and daughter.

Yours most sincerely,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear fellow-worker:_

_I wish to express in person my deep sympathy in the heavy loss you have
sustained. May the Beloved Comforter strengthen you and sustain you in
your bereavement. The memory of your visit to the Holy Land is still fresh
and vivid in my mind and I pray and supplicate at the holy Shrines that
your labours in the Cause may yield an abundant harvest._

_Your sympathising brother, _
_ Shoghi_





PART II
LETTERS TO INDIVIDUALS, APRIL 21ST, 1926--APRIL 21ST, 1934.


The first combined National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá’ís of Australia
and New Zealand was formed in 1934.




(10) August 12th, 1926


My very dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi has been in receipt of your interesting letter dated June
7, 1926. It is a great pity that your health has more or less handicapped
you in your service to the Cause. We, however, hope that this weakness
will soon vanish and your health and strength be fully restored.

The case of the teacher who has been in Palestine is one really to be
lamented. All such persons instead of procuring their information from the
very source, when they are so near to it, they go to the Missionaries who
are undoubtedly biased. They are immediately told that the Cause is
nothing more than a sect of Islam; a Movement that may do immense good to
the Muḥammadan world, but far from ranking with Christianity or satisfying
its needs. Then they refer this ignorant and innocent person to books such
as Brown’s. It is their fault for having gone to the wrong source for
proper information, but once they have gone it is not their mistake to
have been misled. We have heard of many such instances and there is
absolutely no remedy except to leave them until they find the truth for
themselves. We can only pray for their guidance.

Shoghi Effendi always prays for you as well as the other Auckland friends,
so that through your combined efforts the Cause may prosper there, and
obtain a strong position in the life of the people. I am not the least
familiar with the social conditions there, but I am sure there is a ready
field for active service.

Yours in His Name,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear fellow-worker:_

_I rejoice to learn that your dear sons are realizing gradually the
significance of this unique and mighty Cause, and my constant and fervent
prayer is that you may witness erelong the fruition of their slow yet sure
spiritual evolution. Persevere in your labours for I entertain and cherish
the brightest hopes for the future awakening of promising New-Zealand. I
shall ever remember the memorable visit of the first New-Zealand believers
to the Holy Land. Please assure them of my undying affection._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(11) August 12th, 1926


My dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
June 7, 1926. It was most interesting to go over your circular letter and
read the many points of interest. I was especially struck by the
literature you have sent to Lord and Lady Allenby. If they have at all
seen them I am sure they were much impressed, for they knew the Master so
well. They were surely very astonished to see a group of Bahá’ís formed in
such a distant land.

I am very ashamed of myself not to have yet answered your letter of some
months ago. It was mainly because Shoghi Effendi wrote you and
acknowledged the receipt of your contribution for the pilgrim house that I
have been so neglectful. I took Miss Baker’s advice on the matter and
together we went down-town and bought a set of straw chairs. We thought
that would be most appreciated by the friends while sitting in the veranda
of the new Pilgrim House.

I remember a prayer, which you wrote, has been asked by a certain friend
to be read daily. I believe sometimes the friends through their zeal and
ardour do things that are not asked in the Cause. We have only one prayer
that we have to say daily. No one in the world has the power, given to him
by Bahá’u’lláh to add another to that daily prayer. If we should admit
this the life of the friends will soon be spent in mere prayer, which is
not the aim of the Cause. The healing prayer and such ones are only for
occasional use when the need arises.

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to extend to you his hearty greetings and assure
you of his prayers.

Yours in His Name,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear fellow-worker:_

_Your letters are always a source of inspiring joy and stimulating
encouragement to me. You are destined to achieve great things for our
beloved Cause and my constant prayer is that your vision may be clear,
your purpose unshaken, your zeal undiminished, your hopes undimmed. Let
not obstacles and disappointments, which are inevitable, dishearten you
and whenever you are faced with trials recall our Beloved’s innumerable
sufferings. You certainly occupy a warm and abiding place in my heart._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(12) August 25th, 1926


Dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
June 14th 1926, and also thank, through you, the Auckland friends for
their kind contribution.

He wishes me to assure you and them of his earnest prayers. He hopes that
through your constant endeavours the Cause will progress rapidly in that
city and make the spirit of the movement permeate throughout the land.
Though your number is still comparatively small yet through divine
guidance and the Master’s ever wakeful spirit you will soon add many to
your group and make of it a power for goodness which will attract all
attention.

With best wishes and kindest greetings I remain,

Yours ever sincerely,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear fellow-worker:_

_I am touched by this expression of the loyalty and devotion of the
Auckland Bahá’ís whose welfare, and spiritual advancement are the object
of my earnest and constant prayer. I shall devote it to further the
interests of the Cause in ways that are dearest and nearest to my heart. I
shall supplicate the Almighty that strength and wisdom may be given you to
face and overcome the obstacles and trials that you will inevitably
encounter in future. The end is glorious if we only persevere._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(13) September 18th, 1926


Dear Spiritual Brother:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
July 18, 1926. He was very glad to learn of the encouraging prospects you
have for your “Herald of the South”. He hopes that it will daily progress
and add to its importance in drawing the attention of the people there. A
good periodical fully representative of the spirit and teachings of the
Cause is the greatest help the Movement can have in establishing itself in
a country. So though difficulties may be found at the outset, we should
bear them patiently and await that the future should give us our reward.

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to extend to you his loving greetings and assure
you, as well as your mother and Mr Brewer, of his constant prayers. He
hopes that through your combined efforts the Herald of the South will soon
realise its aim and purpose.

Yours in His Service,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear and precious co-worker:_

_Your welcome letter has cheered my heart and I look forward with
confidence and joy to the harvest which you are destined to reap in the
not distant future. I shall be so pleased and grateful if you would send
me regularly a copy of your Bahá’í periodical which I trust and pray will
grow from strength to strength and contribute its destined share to the
progress and consolidation of the Cause of God. Be assured of my prayers
for your happiness, welfare and spiritual advancement._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(14) October 23rd, 1926


Dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
11–9-26. He was most gratified to learn that the Cause is becoming more
and more known and appreciated by the people in New Zealand. This is as
important as the actual increase of the number of the friends, for it
means that the principles are gradually permeating the thoughts of the
people and making them more ready and receptive to the full identification
of their beliefs with the precepts of the Cause.

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to assure you of his prayers for you as well as
for the other friends in New Zealand. He hopes that they will increase
both in number as well as in spiritual understanding and insight. The
reports that we occasionally receive from there are most encouraging and
hopeful. It seems that the people there due to their breadth of mind and
lack of traditional draw-backs show better prospect than many other
places.

With deepest loving greetings,

Yours in His Name,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear co-worker:_

_Your letter rejoiced my heart. I request you to persevere and renew your
splendid efforts for the consolidation of the work already achieved. I
have great hopes in the ‘Herald of the South’ and trust that the Editor
will be guided and strengthened in his noble undertaking. I shall be
obliged if you send me copies of any newspapers that may publish anything
on the Cause as I am preparing a collection of them in the Holy Land.
Please assure the friends in New-Zealand of my continued prayers at the
holy Shrines for the success of their pioneer work._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(15) November 3rd, 1926


Dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
September 13th 1926. He was most gratified to read the nice and
encouraging news it contained.[+E5] He hopes that the “Herald of the
South” will daily increase in importance and now that it is coming out in
printed form, obtain a great number of readers. You should try from the
very start to maintain a high standard for its articles. They should be
broad in view, clear in style and scholarly in their development of the
different subjects. In short the ‘public’ should be taught to consider it
as a paper fully worthwhile to read and meditate upon. Shoghi Effendi will
remember in his prayers all those who are working in this noble field of
service.

Shoghi Effendi desires that you should extend his loving greetings to all
the friends in Auckland. He hopes that through their endeavours and the
Master’s invisible guiding hand they will succeed to raise the standard of
the Cause in that land to such heights that it will arouse the interest of
all the seeking souls and in due time win their support.

The members of the Master’s family are well and send you their loving
greetings.

Yours in His Service,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear co-worker:_

_I shall pray from all my heart for the steady development and the growing
influence of the “Herald of the South”. May its voice grow in strength and
power, and may its pages increasingly reflect the dynamic spirit of the
Faith and mirror forth the ever-expanding activities of the friends in
Australasia as well as in distant lands. Persevere in your efforts, let
not obstacles damp your zeal and determination and rest assured that the
Power of God which is reinforcing your efforts will in the end triumph and
enable you to fulfil your cherished desire._

_Shoghi_




(16) January 11th, 1927


Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Our beloved Guardian has asked me to write to you for him. He is very
pleased with your letter of Dec. 8th which reached him on Jan. 10th and he
is very glad to hear of your activities in New Zealand. He will pray
earnestly that your sincere efforts to make Bahá’u’lláh’s Revelation
widely known will bring forth much fruit and have a great result. In the
newer countries minds are more open, and the people more ready and willing
to receive this Great Message.

With regard to the Queen of Rumania’s 3 articles--he will see that you
receive them correctly. He considers the last one in which she
acknowledges Muḥammad as a true Prophet of God to have great importance
for the East and especially in Persia. This evening, I personally have had
a most interesting conversation with Dr. Habíb of Kermanshah[+E6] who is
now on a visit to Shoghi Effendi with his wife and little girl. He was
telling us of the continued fanaticism of the Moslems of Persia--and how
during two periods of the year especially, the fanatical Mullahs preach
against the Bahá’ís from their pulpits--saying to the ignorant “No matter
what evil things you have done during your life, or what sins you have
committed, if you kill a Bahá’í who is an enemy of Islam, or even if you
take his property or severely injure him, all your own sins will be wiped
out and forgiven for the sake of this good deed of destroying an enemy of
the Faith!!”--in this way they incite the people to deeds of violence and
persecution. He said that the Bahá’í teachings are spreading rapidly
amongst the more educated classes--but it is difficult to teach the very
poor and ignorant fanatical people--tho’ when they do become Believers,
they are very strong and faithful. The 2 periods of particular danger for
the Bahá’ís in Persia are the fast month and the period of
Moharram[+E7]--which lasts for 8 weeks.

Shoghi Effendi is very interested to hear of the engagement of your son to
a Bahá’í young lady--and he prays that in future they may do a great work
for the “Cause”. He hopes so much that you will recover your full health
and strength, and he will pray especially for that. It is good to know
that Esperanto is increasingly studied in New Zealand.

He will certainly pray for Miss Palter(2) and her Mother as you ask him to
do--and also for your dear son and your two daughters. Please accept all
best wishes from myself and Believe me

Yours in His Service,
Ethel J. Rosenberg

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear and able co-worker:_

_I have read the issues of the “Herald” with deep joy and thankfulness. I
will continue to pray at the holy shrines that the invincible power of
Bahá’u’lláh may add to your present opportunities, extend the sphere of
the Journal, and enable you, individually and collectively, to mirror
forth the beauty and the power of this Divine Revelation._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(17) January 30th, 1927


Dear Bahá’í Sister,

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to thank you for the M.O. for £1--which he has
safely received, sent for the help of the sufferers in Persia.

He is himself sending this money to the Nat. Assembly in Teheran, and has
requested them to send him the receipt for it--When he receives their
receipt he will forward it to you, and urges you to give it to the friend
who sent the money. The Persian friends will be very much pleased at
receiving this kind remembrance and help from far distant New Zealand!

With love and warm Bahá’í greetings from the holy household and the
friends here, to the dear friends in Auckland.

In the Master’s Service,

Sincerely Yours,
Ethel J. Rosenberg

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear co-worker:_

_I am deeply touched by this further evidence of the love and devotion of
the New-Zealand Bahá’ís and I will gladly forward their contribution of
our friend to the Teheran Assembly to be sent by them to the sufferers in
Jahrum. I will ardently pray for every one of you that the Beloved may
guide your steps and lead you to glorious victory. I urge you to
communicate regularly and frequently with the Bahá’í newsletter editor
through Mr Horace Holley and report to him the progress of your
activities. It is so essential and valuable._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(18) May 13th, 1927


My dear Bahá’í Sister,

I take pleasure in thanking you on behalf of my dear Guardian for your
letter of April 5th.

As a far away outpost of the Bahá’í Faith in New Zealand, he is always
delighted to hear from Auckland and especially yourself and your promising
Assembly there. You own a warm spot in his heart and he is looking forward
to the day when through the efforts of the Auckland Assembly, centres will
be established in every town in New Zealand. A firm faith and a golden
heart is yours, there still remains to turn other hearts into gold.

Miss Butler is well and often thinks of you. Assuring you of our
Guardian’s prayers and the love and best wishes of the family who always
remember you.

Ever yours in His Service,
Soheil Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear and precious co-worker:_

_You should exercise your judgement and tact in delivering the message.
You should make an effort to understand the character and mind of the
seeker before you speak to him on the Cause. I will pray that you may be
inspired and guided to follow the path of moderation and may become an
exemplary herald of His message in that far-away land._

_Your well-wisher, _
_ Shoghi_




(19) June 4th, 1929


Dear Spiritual Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of Feb.
14th. He always feels great pleasure to obtain some news from the friends
of that distant land and he hopes and prays that through God’s blessings
and your constant endeavours the Cause will develop in New Zealand and
bring into its fold many sincere and devoted souls.

The news that we daily obtain from the different parts of the world bring
in wonderful news of the progress of the Movement. The world is gradually
appreciating the significance of this Movement which has been for so long
misunderstood and denounced.

Yours ever sincerely,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear Spiritual Sister:_

_I wish to assure you in person of my prayers for you as well as the dear
and unforgettable friends in Auckland who assuredly occupy a warm and
abiding place in my heart. I eagerly await the news of the progress of
their work, and trust and pray that the Almighty may guide their steps,
and help them to surmount every obstacle._

_Shoghi_




(20) October 4th, 1930


Dear Bahá’í Brother:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
April 6th 1930 written from London. He was very happy to learn that
wherever you have been you have received wonderful reception from the
friends. Surely, it is only through such acts of hospitality that the true
spirit of the Cause is manifested.

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to assure you of his prayers and extend to you
his hope that wherever you go you will feel the divine help and guidance.
He hopes that in America you will experience the true spirit of love that
animates the friends there and that you will give them Shoghi Effendi’s
greetings.

Yours ever sincerely,
Ruhi Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear and precious co-worker:_

_I was much pleased to hear from you and to learn of your experiences. I
trust that the same welcome and loving-kindness will be extended to you by
the American friends. You are often in my thoughts, and I will continue to
pray for your spiritual as well as material welfare and advancement.
Convey, when you write to your Mother, my loving and affectionate
greetings._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(21) May 18th, 1931


My dear Bahá’í Sister:

I thank you on behalf of the Guardian for your letter of April 16th.

He was very glad to know that you are now on your way to England by way of
America and he hopes that you will find the occasion and the means of
visiting the friends and making permanent connections with them. Bertram
will of course be delighted to meet you and we hope he is successful in
his work there.

I suppose you have all the London addresses as the friends there would be
delighted to meet you. Of course if you do decide to visit Haifa on your
way back, Shoghi Effendi wishes me to assure you of a most hearty welcome.

With his loving greetings to you all and to the young couple in England
and with much love from all here.

Sincerely yours,
Soheil Afnan

[From the Guardian:]

_My dear co-worker:_

_I was so pleased to hear from you and of your plans. I do hope you will
be able to visit the Holy Land where you would be most welcome in
‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s home. I will pray for the success of your efforts from the
depths of my heart when I visit the holy shrines. May the Beloved enable
you to render distinguished services to His Cause and remove every
obstacle from your path._

_Your true brother, _
_ Shoghi_




(22) December 17th, 1931


Dear Bahá’í Sister:

Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated
Dec. 2nd 1931. He is very sorry that you cannot on your way to New
Zealand, break your journey and come over for a short visit to Haifa. But
these are such difficult days that we should not be astonished and
discouraged if our plans fa