# Magic — White and Black
Author: Franz Hartmann
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #35290
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:20:02.214746
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Louise Davies, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









                           MATTIE:--A STRAY.

                           BY F. W. ROBINSON

   THE AUTHOR OF "HIGH CHURCH," "NO CHURCH," "OWEN:-A WAIF," &c., &c.

     "By bestowing blessings upon others, we entail them on ourselves."
        HORACE SMITH.

    IN THREE VOLUMES

    VOL. I.

    LONDON:
    HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,
    SUCCESSORS TO HENRY COLBURN,
    18, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
    1864.

    _The right of Translation is reserved._

    LONDON:
    PRINTED BY MACDONALD AND TUGWELL, BLENHEIM HOUSE,
    BLENHEIM STREET, OXFORD STREET.


              INSCRIBED
                 TO
         ALFRED EAMES, ESQ.,
    ROYAL NAVAL SCHOOL, NEW CROSS,
                 BY
     HIS OLD AND ATTACHED FRIEND
             THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


BOOK I. FIGURES IN OUTLINE.

I. LIFE IN GREAT SUFFOLK STREET

II. MATTIE

III. LODGERS

IV. MR. HINCHFORD'S EXPERIMENT

V. SET UP IN BUSINESS

VI. THE END OF THE PROLOGUE


BOOK II. THE NEW ESTATE.

I. HOME FOR GOOD

II. A GIRL'S ROMANCE

III. OUR CHARACTERS

IV. A NEW ADMIRER

V. PERSEVERANCE

VI. "IN THE FULNESS OF THE HEART," ETC.

VII. CONFIDENCE

VIII. SIDNEY STATES HIS INTENTIONS


BOOK III. UNDER SUSPICION.

I. AN OLD FRIEND

II. STRANGE VISITORS TO GREAT SUFFOLK STREET

III. SIDNEY'S SUGGESTION

IV. PERPLEXITY

V. MR. WESDEN TURNS ECCENTRIC

VI. A BURST OF CONFIDENCE

VII. THE PLAN FRUSTRATED

VIII. A SUDDEN JOURNEY




MATTIE: A STRAY.




BOOK I.

FIGURES IN OUTLINE.




CHAPTER I.

LIFE IN GREAT SUFFOLK STREET.


It was not an evening party of the first water, or given by people of
first-rate position in society, or held in a quarter whither the
fashionable classes most do congregate. It was a small party--ostensibly
a juvenile party--held on the first floor of a stationer's shop in Great
Suffolk Street, Southwark.

Not even a first-rate stationers', had the shutters been down and the
fog less dense to allow us to inspect Mr. Wesden's wares; but an
emporium, which did business in no end of things--cigars, tobacco-pipes,
children's toys, glass beads by the skein or ounce, fancy work, cottons
and tapes. These, the off-shoots from the stationery business, the
news-vending, the circulating of novels in four, five, and six volumes
at one penny per volume, if not detained more than three days; a
stationery business which report said had not turned out badly for old
Wesden, thanks to old Wesden's patience, industry and care, say
we--thanks to his screwing and his close-fistedness that would not have
trusted his own mother, had she lived, said the good people--for there
are good people everywhere--in Great Suffolk Street. Certainly, there
were but small signs of "close-fistedness" about the premises on that
particular evening; the shop had been closed at an earlier hour than
business men would have considered suitable. They were wasting the gas
in Mr. Wesden's drawing-room; feasting and revelry held dominion there.
There had been three separate knocks given at the door from three
separate Ganymedes--No. 1, with oranges; No. 2, with tarts from the
pastry-cook; No. 3, with beer, which last was left in a tin can of
colossal proportions, supper not being ready, and beer being liable to
flatness in jugs--especially the beer from the Crown.

We watch all this from the outside, in the thick fog which made things
unpleasant in Great Suffolk Street. There is more life, and life that
appertains to this chapter of our history, outside here than in that
first floor front, where the sons and daughters of Mr. Wesden's
neighbours are playing at forfeits, romping, jumping, and laughing, and
thoroughly enjoying themselves. They are not thinking of the fog, the
up-stairs folk shut away from the rawness of that January night; it
would have troubled Mr. Wesden had his shop been open, and led him to
maintain a stricter watch over the goods, and upon those customers whose
faces might be strange to him; but he had forgotten the weather at that
juncture, and sat in the corner of the drawing-room, smoking his pipe,
and keeping his daughter--a bright-faced, golden-haired girl of
twelve--within his range of vision. The fog and the cold troubled no one
at Mr. Wesden's--only "outsiders" objected, and remarked upon them to
friends when they met, coughing over one, and shivering through the
other, as lungs and scanty clothes necessitated. The establishment of
Mr. Wesden, stationer, troubled or attracted, an outsider though, who
had passed and repassed it three or four times between the hours of
eight and nine, p.m., and at half-past nine had backed into the recess
of Mr. Wesden's doorway. A small outsider, of uncertain age--a boy, a
nondescript, an anything, judging by the pinched white face and unkempt
hair; a girl, by the rag of a frock that hung upon her, and from which
her legs and feet protruded.

Subject matter of great interest was there for this small
watcher--huddled in the doorway, clutching her elbows with her bony
fingers, and listening at the keyhole, or varying proceedings now and
then by stepping on to the clammy pavement, and looking up, through the
fog, at the lighted blinds, once or twice indulging in a flat-footed
kind of jig, to keep her feet warm. She was one of few loiterers in
Great Suffolk Street that uncomfortable night--men, women, and boys
hurried rapidly past, and thinned in number as the night stole on--only
a policeman slouched by occasionally, and dismayed her somewhat, judging
by her closer proximity to Mr. Wesden's street door, whenever his heavy
tread jarred upon her nerves.

When the majority of the shops was closed, when the fog grew denser as
the lights went out, and the few stragglers became more phantom-like and
grey, quite a regiment of policemen marched down Great Suffolk Street,
changing places at certain corners with those officials who had done
day-duty, and glad to have done, for that day at least.

The new policeman who crawled upon Mr. Wesden's side of the way, was a
sharper man than he who had left off crawling, and gone home at a gallop
to his wife and thirteen children; for the new-comer was not deceived by
the deep-doorway and the dense fog, but reached forth a hand and touched
the figure cowering in the shadows.

A red-faced young man, with a bull neck, was this Suffolk Street
official--an abrupt young man, who shook people rather violently by the
shoulder, and hurt them.

"Oh!--stash that, please," ejaculated the child, at last; "you hurts!"

"What do you want here?"

"Nothin' partickler. If the young gal inside knows I'm here, she'll send
out somethin' prime. That's all. Last thing, afore she goes to bed, she
comes and looks, mostly. She's a good 'un."

"Ah! you'd better go home."

"Can't manage to make it up tuppence--and square the last penny with
Mother Watts. You know Mother Watts?"

"Ah!"

"Well, she's down upon me, Watts is--so I can't go home."

"You must go somewhere--you can't stop here."

"Lor bless you, this is the comfortablest doorway in the street, if you
don't mind, p'leesman. I often turn in here for the night, and some of
you fine fellers lets a gal bide, and ain't so down upon her as you are.
You're new to this beat."

"Am I, really?" was the ironical rejoinder.

"You used to do Kent Street and stir up Mother Watts. You locked up
Mother Watts once--don't you remember?"

"Yes--I remember. Are you going?"

"If you won't let a gal stay, o' course I am. They've got a jolly
kick-up here--that gal with the blue frock's birthday--old Wesden's gal,
as I just told you about--I wish I was her! Did you ever see her of a
Sunday?"

"Not that I know on."

"Just like the little gals at the play--spruce as carrots--and gloves
on, and such boots! Fust rate, I can tell you."

"I wouldn't jaw any more, but go home," suggested the policeman.

"All right, master. I say, don't you twig how the fog has got on my
chest?"

"Well, you _are_ hoarse-ish."

"Spilt my woice yesterday, and made it wus by tryin' it on in Union
Street to-day. Gave it up, and bought a haporth of lucifers, and got the
boxes in my pocket now. Hard lines to-night, mate."

Familiarity breeds contempt and engenders rebuke--the loquacity of the
child offended the official, who drew her from the doorway with a jerk,
totally unexpected upon her side, and placed her in the roadway.

"Now be off from here--I've had enough of _you_."

"Werry well--why didn't you say so afore?"

And, without waiting for a reply to her query, the child went down Great
Suffolk Street towards the Borough, sullenly and slowly. The policeman
watched her vanish in the fog, and resumed his way; he had done his duty
to society, and "moved on" one who had insulted it by her helplessness
and squalor; there was a woman shrieking denunciations on the pot-man of
the public house at the corner--a man who had turned her unceremoniously
into the street--let him proceed to business in a new direction.

Twenty steps on his way, and the ill-clad, sharp-visaged girl, stealing
back in the fog to the welcome doorway whence he had abruptly expelled
her.

"He's not everybody," she ejaculated, screwing herself comfortably into
her old quarters, "though he thinks he is. I wonder what they're up to
now? Don't I wish it was my buff-day, and somebody had somethink to give
me, that's all. Don't I--oh! gemini."

"Hillo!--I beg pardon--I didn't know anyone was hiding here--have I hurt
you?" inquired a youth, who, running down Great Suffolk Street at a
smart pace, had turned into this doorway, and nearly jammed its occupant
to death with the sudden concussion.

"You've done for my lights, young un," was the grave assertion.

"Your--your what?"

"My congreve lights--there's a kiver gone--I heered it scrunch. S'pose
you'll pay like a--like a man?"

"I--I'm very sorry, but really I'm rather scarce of pocket-money just
now--in fact, I've spent it all," stammered the lad. "You see, it was
your fault, hiding here, and playing about here at this time of night,
and I was in a hurry, being late."

"There isn't anyone inside who'd stand a ha-penny, is there?" whined the
girl; "I'm the gal that's allus about here, you know--I've had nuffin'
to eat to-day, and ain't no money for a night's lodging. I'm hard
up--wery hard up, upon my soul. I don't remember being so druv since
mother died o' the fever--never. And I'm not well--got a sore throat,
which the fog touches up--awful."

"I'll--I'll ask my pa'; but I don't think there is anything to give
away."

The youth knocked at the door, and presently rushed by the servant who
opened it, paying no heed to the remark of--

"Well, you are late, Master Sidney, I must say!"

The door closed again, and Master Sidney--a tall lad of fourteen, with
long brown hair, brown eyes, and a white face--tore up the stairs two
steps at a time, and dashed with but little ceremony into the
dining-room, where the supper was laid by that time, and the juveniles
were ranged round the table, large-eyed and hungry.

A shout from the boys assembled there--"Here's Sidney Hinchford;" a
reproof from a stiff-backed, white-haired old gentleman in the
corner--"Where _have_ you been, boy?" a light-haired fairy in white
muslin and blue sash darting towards him, crying, "Sidney, Sidney, I
thought you were lost!"

"So I have been--lost in the fog--such a mull of it! I'll tell you
presently when I've spoken to pa' for a moment. And, oh! Harriet,
here's--here's a little brooch I've bought, and with many happy, happy
returns of the day from a tiresome playfellow, and--and--_stolen, by
Jingo_!"

The hand withdrew itself from the side pocket of his jacket, and was
passed over the forehead, the lower jaw dropped, the brown eyes glared
round the room, across at the opposite wall, and up at the gas branch--a
two-burner of a bronze finger-post pattern,--and then Master Sidney
doubled up suddenly and collapsed.




CHAPTER II.

MATTIE.


Mrs. Sarah Jane Watts, better known to society and society's guardians
by the cognomen of Mother Watts, kept a lodging-house in Kent Street.
They who know where Kent Street, Borough is, and what Kent Street is
like by night and day, can readily imagine that the establishment of
Mrs. Watts was not a large one, or the prices likely to be high. Mrs.
Watts' house, in fact, belonged not to Kent Street proper, but formed
No. 2 of a cut-throat-looking court, crossing Kent Street at right
angles. Here beds, or shares of beds, or shelves arranged horizontally
under beds, were let out at twopence per head, or three-halfpence
without the blankets, which were marked, "Stop Thief!"

Whether Mrs. Watts did badly with her business, or whether business
prospered with her, it was difficult to determine by the landlady's
external appearance, Mrs. W. being ever in rags, ever full of complaints
and--drink. "Times" were always hard with her--the police were hard with
her--her Kent Street contemporaries were hard with her--didn't treat her
fair, undersold her, put more in a bed and charged less--"split upon her
when things weren't on the square. Kent Street wasn't what it was when
she was a gal!"

People constantly breathing the same atmosphere may notice a change in
the "surroundings," but to common observers, or prying people paying
occasional visits to this place, Kent Street seems ever the same--an
eye-sore to public gaze, a satire on parish cleanliness and care, a
disgrace to parish authorities in general, and landlords and ground
landlords in particular.

Ever to common eyes the same appearances in Kent Street. The bustle of a
cheap trade in its shops; the knots of thieves and loose-livers at every
narrow turning; the murmurs of unseen disputants, in the true London
vernacular, welling from dark entries and up-stairs rooms; the shoals of
children, hatless, shoeless, almost garmentless--all a medley of sights
and sounds, increasing towards night-fall, when Kent Street is full of
horror, and lives and purses are not safe there.

It is eleven in the evening of the same day, in which our story opens,
and Mrs. Sarah Jane Watts, baggy as regards costume, and unsteady as
regards her legs, was standing in the doorway of her domicile,
inspecting, by the light of the candle in her hand, a trinket of some
kind, which had been proffered her by a smaller mortal, infinitely more
ragged than herself.

"You got it honestly--I takes your word for it--you allers was a gal who
spoke the truth, I will say that for you--it's a sham affair, and brassy
as a knocker--say eightpence?"

"It's really gold, Mrs. Watts--it's worth a heap of money."

"It's the brassiest thing that ever I clapped eyes on--say eightpence
and a bit of supper?"

"What sort o' supper?"

"Hot supper--tripe and inguns--as much as you can pad with."

"It's worth a sight more, if it's gold."

"I'll ask Simes--go up-stairs and wait a minit'--Simes'll tell us if
it's gold, and praps stand more for it. I don't want the thing--I don't
think it's safe to keep, myself; and if you've prigged it, Mattie, why,
you'd better let it go."

"Very well."

Mattie--the girl whom we have watched in the dark entry of Mr. Wesden's
door, wearied out with Mrs. Watts' loquacity, or overpowered by her
arguments, went up-stairs into a room on the first floor. A long,
low-ceilinged room, containing three beds, and each bed containing four
women and a few supplementary children, one affected with a
whooping-cough that was evidently fast racking it to death. This was the
feminine dormitory of Mrs. Watts--a place well known to London women in
search of a night's rest, Southwark way--a place for the ballad singer
who had twopence to spend, or a soul above the workhouse; for the
beggar-women who had whined about the streets all day; for the tramps
passing from Surrey to Essex, and taking London _en route_; for women of
all callings, who were deplorably poor, idle or vicious--it mattered
not, so that they paid Mrs. Watts her claim upon them.

Mattie sat down by the fire, and began shivering with more violence than
had characterized her in the cold and fog. The disturbed shadow, flung
by the fire-light--the only light there--on the wall, shivered and
danced grotesquely in the rear. No one took notice of the
new-comer--although more than one woman lay awake in the background. A
wrinkled hag, reposing with her basket of stay-laces under her head for
security's sake, winked and blinked at her for a while, and then went
off into a disjointed snore--the young mother with the sick child, sat
up in her share of the bed, and rocked the coughing infant backwards and
forwards, till her neighbour, with an oath, swore at her for letting the
cold in; then all was as Mattie had found it upon entering.

Presently Mrs. Watts returned, candle in hand, smelling more
aromatically of something hot and strong than ever.

"Simes says it's brass, and worth eightpence, and here's the money.
Strike me dead, if he said more than eightpence, there!--strike him
blind, if he'll get a farden out of it!"

"Where's the money?"

"Here's fippence--tuppence for to-night, and a penny you owe me, that
makes eightpence; and as for supper, why, I'll keep my word--no one can
ever say of Mother Watts that she didn't keep her word in anythink she
undertooked."

"I--I don't care so much about supper as I did--ain't I just husky? No
singing to-morrow, mother."

"Only singing small," was the rejoinder with a grunt at her own wit;
"you'd do better picking up brooches--you was allers clever with your
fingers, mind you. I only wish I'd been 'arf as sharp when I was young."

"I--I only wish I hadn't--found the thing," commented the girl,
sorrowfully.

"Well, I'm blest!"

Mrs. Watts was taking off the lid of her saucepan, and probing the
contents with a fork.

"Fippence isn't a fortun, and the young chap gave me a ha-penny once
when I was singing in Suffolk Street--I didn't mean it, somehow--I said
I never would again! Don't you remember when mother died here, how she
went on just at the last as to what was to become o' me; and didn't I
say I'd grow up good, and stick to singing and begging, and all that
_fun_--or go to the workus--or anythink?"

"Ah! your mother was a fine 'un to go on sometimes."

"And then I----"

"Now, I don't want to hear anythink about your goings on--I don't know
where you found that brassy brooch--I don't want to know--Simes don't
want to know! We takes your word for it, that it was come by proper, and
the less you say about it, the better; and the sooner you turns into
bed, if you don't want no supper, the better too."

"I don't see a good twopen'orth over there," commented Mattie; "they're
as full as ever they can stick."

"Take the rug, gal, and have it all to yourself, here by the fire."

"Well, it's not so bad. I say--you know old Wesden?"

"What, in Suffolk Street?--well."

"He's got a party to-night--I have been a listening to the
music--they've been dancing and all manner. And laughing--my eye! they
just have been a-laughing, Mother Watts--I've been laughing myself to
hear 'em."

"Um," was the unsympathetic response.

"It's a buff-day--Wesden's gal's buff-day. You know Wesden's gal--proud
of herself rather, and holds her head up in furst-rate style, as well
she may with such a shop as her father's got in Suffolk Street, and good
and pretty as she is, Lor bless her! I s'pose old Wesden's worth pounds
and pounds now?"

"Hundreds."

"Hundreds and hundreds of pounds," commented Mattie, coiling herself in
the rug upon the floor; "ah! I s'pose so. I often thinks, do you know, I
should like to be Wesden's little gal--what a lucky thing it'd be to be
turned somehow into Wesden's little gal, just at Christmas time, when
fairies are about."

"What!"

"Real fairies, on course--not the gals with the legs in the pantermines.
If there was any real fairies on course too, but I'm too knowing to
b'lieve that. But if there was, I'd say, please turn me into Wesden's
little gal, and give me the big doll by the parler door, and dress me
like a lady in a blue meriner."

"Well, you are going on nicely about Wesden's gal. That was allus your
fault, Mattie--such a gal to jaw, jaw, jaw--such a clapper, clapper,
clapper about everythink and everybody."

"I was just a-thinking that I _was_ going it rather, but I ain't a bit
sleepy, and I thought you wouldn't mind me while you was having your
supper, and my throat's so awful sore, and you ain't so sharp quite, as
you are sometimes. Do you know what I'd do, if I was a boy?"

"How should I know?"

"Go to sea--get away from here, and grow up 'spectable. I wouldn't stop
in Kent Street--I hate Kent Street--I'd walk into the country--oh! ever
so far--until I came to the sea, and then I'd find a ship and turn
sailor."

"Lookee here, you young drab," cried the stay-lace woman, suddenly
opening her eyes, and shrieking out in a shrill falsetto, "I'll turn out
and skin you, if you can't keep that tongue still. What am I here
for?--what did I pay tuppence for?--isn't that cussed coughing baby
enough row at a time?"

"If you've got anythink to say aginst my baby," said a husky voice in
the next bed, "say it out to his mother, and mind your cat's head while
you say it, you disagreeable baggage!"

"Well, the likes of that!"

"And the likes of you, for that matter--don't give me any more of your
sarse, or I'll----"

A tapping on the door with a stick diverted the general attention.

"Who's there?"

"Only me, Mrs. Watts."

"Oh! _only_ you," was the response; "come in, will yer? I've no need to
lock myself in, while I hide the swag away. _Now_, what's the matter?"

The door was opened, and enter a policeman, a man in private clothes,
with a billycock hat and a walking-stick, accompanied by a pale-faced,
long-haired youth, of fourteen years of age.

"Nothing particular the matter--only something lost as usual, Mrs.
Watts," said the man in private dress, politely. "Where's Mattie
to-night?"

"There she is. She's been in all the evening with a bad throat."

"Poor girl--throats _is_ bad at this time of the year."

The speaker looked at the lad at his side, after giving the first turn
backward to the rug.

"Is this the girl?"

The policeman took the candle from the table, and held the light close
to the girl's face--white, pinched, and haggard, with black eyes full of
horror.

"Don't say it's me, please," she gasped, in a low voice; "I'm the gal
that sings in Suffolk Street on a Saturday night, and they gives wittles
to at Wesden's. It isn't me."

Mattie had intended to brave it out at first, to have remained stolid,
sullen, and defiant, after the manners of her class; but she felt ill
and nervous, and the shadow of the prison-house loomed before her and
made her heart sink. Prison was a comfortable place in its way, but she
had never taken to it--one turn at it had been enough for her. If it had
been a policeman, or old Wesden, or anybody but this boy three years her
senior in age, many years her junior in knowledge of the world, she
would have been phlegmatic to the last; but this boy had been kind to
her twice in life--once on Christmas-eve, and once on a Saturday night
before that, and she gave way somewhat, partly from her new and
unaccountable weakness, partly because it was not a very stern face that
looked down into hers.

"That's her, sure enough--eh, young gentleman?" remarked the police
officer in private clothes.

There was another pause--the girl's face blanched still more, and the
look in her eyes became even more intense and eager; the boy glanced
over his shoulder at the servants of the law.

"No--this isn't the girl. Oh! no."

"Are you quite certain? Stand up, Mattie."

Mattie turned out of her rug and stood up, erect and motionless, with
her hands to her side, and her sharp black eyes still on Master
Hinchford.

"Oh! no, policeman. Ever so much taller!"

"Then we're on the wrong scent it seems, and you'd better go home and
leave it to us. Good night, Mrs. Watts."

"Good night," was the muttered response.

Policeman, detective, and Master Hinchford went down the stairs to the
court, out of the court into Kent Street, black and noisome--a turgid
current, that wore only a semblance of stillness at hours more late than
that.

"We'll let you know in the morning if there's any clue," said the
detective. "Jem," to the policeman, "see this lad out of Kent Street."

"All right. I think I'd try old Simes for the brooch."

"I'll drop on him presently. Good night, Jem."

"Good night."

The boy and policeman went to the end of Kent Street together, then the
boy bade the policeman good night, ran across the road, recrossed in the
fog a little lower down, and edged his way round St. George's Church
into the old objectionable thoroughfare. A few minutes afterwards, he
walked cautiously into the up-stairs room of Mrs. Watts, startling that
good lady at her late tripe supper very considerably.

"Hollo! young gemman, what's up now?"

Mattie, who had been crouching before the fire, shrank towards it more,
with her hands spread out to the blaze. She looked over her shoulder at
the door, anticipating his two unwelcome companions to follow in his
wake.

"Look here, Mattie," said he, in a very cool and business-like manner,
"fair's fair, you know. I've let you off in a handsome manner, but I'm
not going to lose the brooch. If it had been a trumpery brooch, I
shouldn't have cared so much."

"Was it real gold?"

"A real gold heart. I gave twelve and sixpence for it--I've been saving
up for it ever since last April."

"I'll get it--I'll try and get it," said Mattie; "I haven't it myself
now--it's been passed on. Upon my soul, I'll try my hardest to get it
back, see if I don't."

"We'll all try our werry hardest, sir," remarked Mrs. Watts, blandly.

"Ah! I daresay you will," said the boy, dubiously; "p'raps it had been
better if I'd told the truth--my pa always says 'Stick to the truth,
Sidney;' but you did look such a poor body to lock up, that I told a lie
for once. And who would have thought that you were a regular thief,
Mattie!"

"I'm not a reg'lar--I don't like thieving--I've only thove when I've
been werry--werry--hard druv; and I wasn't thinking of thieving, ony of
getting warm, when you came bump aginst me in the doorway. I meant to
have knocked and asked for a scrap to eat after awhile, when they'd all
got good-tempered over the beer and things. I'll bring the brooch--I'll
get it back--leave it to me, Master Hinchford."

"How did you know my name?"

"Oh! I know everybody about here--everybody at your place, 'specially.
Old Wesden and his gal in the blue meriner--and you, and your father
with the red face and the white mustache and hair--and the servant, and
the boy who takes the papers out, and is allus dropping them out of the
oil-skin kiver, and everybody. I'll bring the brooch, because you let me
off. Trust me," she repeated again.

"Well, I'll trust you. Fair play, mind."

"And now, cut out of this--it isn't quite a safe place for you, and the
people can't sleep if you talk, and you may catch the whooping
cough----"

"And you'll bring the brooch back? It's a bargain between us, Mattie."

"It's all right."

The youth re-echoed "all right," and went down-stairs, watched from the
dark landing by the girl who had robbed him. After a while the girl
closed the door and followed slowly down-stairs also. She was going in
search of old Simes.




CHAPTER III.

LODGERS.


"Depend upon it, Sidney, you'll never set eyes on that brooch again."

"I'm not so sure about that," was the half-confident reply.

"And depend upon it, you don't deserve to see it, boy--and that I for
one shall be glad if it never turns up."

"Pa!--you really can't mean it."

"You told a lie about it, Sidney, and though you saved the girl from
prison, yet it was a big, black lie all the same; and if luck follows
it, why it's clean against the Bible."

"The girl looked so pitifully at me, you see--and I did think she might
give the brooch back, out of gratitude."

"Gratitude in a young thief out of Kent Street?" laughed the father;
"well, it's a lesson in life to you, boy, and, after all, it only cost
twelve and sixpence."

"Ah!" sighed Sidney, "it was a long pull."

"You'll have learned by this that a lie never prospers--that in the long
run it confronts you again when least expected, to make your cheek burn
with your own baseness. I wonder now," gravely surveying his son,
"whether you would have let that girl off, if there had been no hope of
the brooch coming to light."

The boy hesitated--then looked full at his sire.

"Well--I think I should."

"I think you told a lie for twelve and sixpence--the devil got a bargain
from a Hinchford."

"You're rather hard upon me, pa," complained the boy, "and it wasn't for
twelve and sixpence, because I never got the brooch back; and if I ever
tell another lie, may I never see twelve and sixpence of my own again.
There!"

"Bravo, Sid!--that's a promise I'm glad to have wormed out of you,
somehow. And yet--ye gods!--what a promise!"

"I'll keep it--see if I don't," said Master Sidney, with his lips
compressed, and his cheeks a little flushed.

The father shook his head slowly.

"You are going into business--you will be a business man,--presently a
City man--one who will drive hard bargains, make hard bargains, and have
to fight his way through a hundred thousand liars. In the pursuit of
money--above all, in the scraping together of that fugitive article, you
must lie, or let a good chance go by to turn an honest penny. I can't
expect you _much_ better than other men, Sid."

"I wonder whether uncle lied much before----"

"He lied as little as he could, I daresay," quickly interrupted the
father, "but he became a rich man, and he rose from City trading. But I
told you once before--I think I have told you more than once--that I
never wish to hear that uncle's name."

"Yes, but I had forgotten it for the moment--speaking of money-making,
and City men, threw me a little off my guard."

"Yes, yes, I saw that, my boy--drop the curtain over the old grievance,
and shut the past away from you and me. I don't complain--I'm happy
enough--a little contents me. In the future, with a son to love and be
proud of, I see the old man's happiest days!"

"We'll try our best, sir, to make them so," exclaimed the boy.

"The Hinchfords are a buoyant race, and are not to be always kept down.
I never heard of more than one of us, a poor man in the same generation;
the Hinchfords have intelligence, perseverance, and pluck, and they make
their way in the world. If I have been unlucky in my time, and have
dropped down to a lodging in Great Suffolk Street, I see the next on the
list," laying his hand lightly on his boy's shoulder, "making his way to
the higher ground, God willing."

"I haven't made much way yet," remarked the son, checking quietly the
ambitious dreaming of the father. "I have only left school two months,
and an office-boy in Hippen's firm is not a very great affair, after
all."

"It's a step forward--don't grumble--you'll push your way--you're a
Hinchford."

"I'll do my best--I never was afraid of work."

"No--rather too fond of it, I fear. Sometimes I think there is no
occasion to pore, pore, pore over those books of an evening, studying a
lot of dry works, which can never be of service to a City man."

"I should like to be _precious_ clever!" was the boy's exclamation.

The father laughed, and added, with more satire than the boy detected--

"The precious clever ones seek out-of-the-way roads to fortune, and miss
them--die in the workhouse, occasionally. It is only respectable
mediocrity that jogs on to independence."

This strange dialogue between father and son occurred in the first-floor
of the little stationer's shop in Great Suffolk Street. Father and son
had lodged there eight years at least; Mrs. Hinchford, a delicate woman,
several years her husband's junior, had died there--the place was home
to the stiff-backed, white-haired man, who had prophesied a rise in life
for his son. Eight or nine years ago, the three Hinchfords had walked
into Mr. Wesden's shop, and looked at the apartments that had been
announced to be let from the front pane of the first-floor windows; had,
after a little whispering together, decided on the rooms, and had never
left them since, the wife excepted, who had died with her husband's hand
in hers, praying for her boy's future. The Hinchfords had settled as
firmly to those rooms on the first-floor, as Mr. Wesden, stationer, had
settled to Great Suffolk Street in ages remote. The rent was low, the
place was handy for Mr. Hinchford, who was clerk and book-keeper to a
large builders, Southwark Bridge Road way; the attendance was not a
matter of trouble to the Hinchfords, and the landlord and his wife were
unobtrusive people, and preferred the lodgers rent to their society.

For three years and a half the Hinchfords and Wesdens had only exchanged
good mornings in their meetings on the stairs--the Wesdens were humble,
taciturn folk, and the Hinchfords proud and stand-offish. After that
period Mrs. Hinchford fell ill, and Mrs. Wesden became of service to
her; helped, at last, to nurse her, and keep her company during the long
hours of her husband's absence at business, even to take care of her
noisy boy down-stairs, when his boisterousness in the holidays made his
presence--much as the mother loved him--unbearable. The Wesdens were
kind to the Hinchfords, and Mr. Hinchford, a man to be touched by true
sympathy, unbent at that time. He was a proud man, but a sensible one,
and he never forgot a kindness proffered him. He had belonged to a
higher estate once, and, dropping suddenly to a lower, he had brought
his old notions with him, to render him wretched and uneasy. He had
thought himself above those Wesdens--petty hucksters, as they
were--until the time when Mrs. Wesden became a kind nurse to his wife,
almost a mother to his boy; and then he felt his own inferiority to a
something in them, or belonging to them, and was for ever after that
intensely grateful.

When Mrs. Hinchford died, and the lonely man had got over his first
grief, he sought Mr. Wesden's company more often, smoked a friendly pipe
with him in the back parlour now and then--begged to do so, for refuge
from that solitary drawing-room up-stairs, filled with such sad memories
as it was then. Hinchford and Wesden did not talk much, the latter was
not fond of talking; and they were odd meetings enough, either in the
parlour, or in the up-stairs room, as business necessitated.

They exchanged a few words about the weather, and the latest news in the
papers, and then subsided into their tobacco-smoke till it was time to
say good night; but Wesden was company for Hinchford in his trouble, and
when time rendered the trouble less acute, each had fallen into the
habit of smoking a pipe together once or twice a week, and did not care
to break it.

In the parlour meetings, Mrs. Wesden would bring her spare form and
pinched countenance between them, and would sit darning socks and saying
little to relieve the monotony--unless the little girl were sitting up
late, and her vivacity required attention or reprimand. They were quiet
evenings with a vengeance, and Hinchford took his cue from the couple
who managed business in Great Suffolk Street--and managed it well, for
they minded their own, and were not disturbed by other people's.

Whilst we are looking back--taking a passing glimpse over our shoulder
at the bygones--we may as well add, that the Wesdens were naturally
quiet people, and did not put on company-manners for Mr. Hinchford in
particular. Thirty years ago they had married and opened shop in Great
Suffolk Street; struggled for a living without making a fuss about it;
lived frugally, pinched themselves in many ways which the world never
knew anything about; surmounted the first obstacles in their way, and
then, in the same quiet manner, saved a little money, then a little
more, and then, as if by habit, continued saving, maintaining the same
appearance in themselves, and the same quaint stolidity towards their
neighbours. They had even borne their family troubles quietly, losing
three children out of four without any great demonstration of
grief--keeping their lamentations for after-business hours, and their
inflexible faces for their curious neighbours, to whom they seldom
spoke, and from whom they chose no friends. They were a couple contented
with themselves and their position in society,--a trifle too frugal, if
not near--staid, jogtrot, business people of week days, church-goers who
patronized free seats for economy's sake on Sundays.

Once a year the Wesdens launched out--celebrating, in the month of
January, the natal day of the bright-faced girl in whom so much love was
centred, for whom they were working steadily and persistently still.
They had a juvenile party on that day always, and Harriet's school
friends came in shoals to the feast, and Mr. Wesden presented his
compliments to Mr. Hinchford, and begged the favour of borrowing the
drawing-room for one night, and hoped also to have the honour of Mr.
Hinchford's company, and Master Hinchford's company, on that
occasion--all of which being responded to in the affirmative, affairs
went off, as a rule, satisfactorily, until that momentous night in
January, when Master Sidney Hinchford lost his brooch.

This incident altered many things, and led to many things undreamed of
by the characters yet but in outline in these pages; without it we
should not have sat down to tell the history of these people--bound up
so inextricably with that poor wanderer of the streets whom we have
heard called Mattie.




CHAPTER IV.

MR. HINCHFORD'S EXPERIMENT.


The middle of March; six weeks since the robbery of Master Hinchfords'
gold heart; a wet night in lieu of a foggy one; a cold wind sweeping
down the street and dashing the rain all manner of ways; pattens and
clogs clicking and shuffling about the pavement of Great Suffolk Street;
the stationery shop open, and Mr. Wesden at seven o'clock sitting behind
the counter waiting patiently for customers.

Being a wet night, and customers likely to be scarce in consequence, Mr.
Wesden had carefully turned out one gas burner and lowered the two
others in the window to imperceptible glimmers of a despondent
character, and then taken his seat behind the counter ready for any
amount of business that might turn up between seven and half-past nine
p.m. The gas was burning more brightly in the back parlour, through the
closed glass door of which Mrs. Wesden was cutting out shirts, and Miss
Wesden learning, or feigning to learn, her school lessons for the
morrow.

Mr. Wesden was devoting his mind purely to business; in his shop he
never read a book, or looked at a newspaper, but waited for customers,
always in one position, with his head slightly bent forwards, and his
hands clutching his knees. In that position the largest order had not
the power to stagger him--the smallest order could not take him off his
guard. He bent his mind to business--he was "on duty" for the evening.

Mr. Wesden was a short, spare man, with a narrow chest, a wrinkled face,
a sharp nose, and a sandy head of hair--a man whose clothes were shabby,
and ill fitted him, the latter not to be wondered at, Mrs. Wesden being
the tailor, and making everything at home. This saved money, and
satisfied Mr. Wesden, who cared not for appearances, had a soul above
the fashion, and a faith in his wife's judgment. In the old days Mrs.
Wesden was forced to turn tailor and trouser-maker, or see her husband
without trousers at all; tailoring had become a habit since then, and
agreed with her--it saved money still, and economy was ever a virtue
with this frugal pair.

Mr. Wesden in his shop-suit then--that was his shabbiest suit, and
exceedingly shabby it was--sat and waited for customers. He waited
patiently; to those who strayed in for sheets of note-paper, books to
read, shirt-buttons, tapes, or beads, he was very attentive, settling
the demands with promptitude and despatch, saying little save "a wet
evening," and not to be led into a divergence about a hundred matters
foreign to business, until the articles were paid for, and the money in
his till. Then, if a few loquacious customers _would_ gossip about the
times, he condescended to listen, regarding them from his meaningless
grey eyes, and responding in monosyllables, when occasion or politeness
required some kind of answer. But he was always glad to see their faces
turned towards the door--they wearied him very much, these people, and
it was odd they could not take away the articles they had purchased, and
go home in quietness.

To people in the streets who, caught by some attraction in his window,
stopped and looked thereat, he was watchful from behind his
counter--speculating as to whether they were probable purchasers, or had
felonious designs. He was a suspicious man to a certain extent as well
as a careful one, and no one lingered at his window without becoming an
object of interest from behind the tobacco-jars and penny numbers. On
this evening a haggard white face--whether a girl or woman's he could
not make out for the mist on the window-panes--had appeared several
times before the shop-window, and looked in, over the beads, and tapes,
and through packets of paper, _at him_. Not interested at anything for
sale, but keeping an eye on him, he felt assured.

He had a bill in the window--"A BOY WANTED"--and if it had been a boy's
face flitting about in the rain there, he should not have been so full
of doubts as to the object with which he was watched; but there was a
battered bonnet on the head of the watcher, and therefore no room for
speculation concerning sex, at least.

After an hour's fugitive dodging, Mattie--for it was she--came at a slow
rate into the shop. She walked forwards very feebly, and took a firm
grip of the counter to steady herself.

Mr. Wesden critically surveyed her from his post of observation; she did
not speak, but she kept her black eyes directed to the face in front of
her.

"Well--what do you want, Mattie?" asked Mr. Wesden, finally.

"Nothin'--that is to buy."

"Ah! then we've nothing to give away for you any more."

"I want to speak to Master Hinchford," said Mattie; "I've come about the
brooch."

"Not brought it back!" exclaimed Mr. Wesden, roused out of his apathetic
demeanour by this assertion.

"I wish I had--no, I on'y want to see him."

Mr. Wesden called to his wife, and delivered Mattie's request through
the glass, keeping one eye on the new comer all the while. Mrs. Wesden
sent her daughter up-stairs with the message, and presently from a side
door opening into the shop Miss Wesden made her appearance.

"If you please, will you walk up-stairs?"

Harriet Wesden spoke very kindly, and edged away from Mattie as she
advanced--Mattie was the girl who had stolen the brooch, a strange
creature from an uncivilized world, and the stationer's little daughter
was afraid of her old pensioner.

The girl from the streets stared at Harriet Wesden in her turn, looked
very intently at her warm dress and white pinafore, and then looked back
at Mr. Wesden.

"May I go up, sir?"

"I don't see why they can't come down here," he grumbled, "but you must
go up if they want to see you. Stop here, Harriet, and call Ann--you
might catch something, girl."

Ann was called, and presently a broad-faced, red-armed girl made her
appearance.

"Show a light to this girl up-stairs, Ann."

"This girl--here?"

"Yes--that girl there."

"Oh! lawks--so _you've_ turned up agin."

Mattie did not answer--she seemed very weak and ill, and not inclined to
waste words foreign to her motive in appearing there. She followed the
servant up-stairs, pausing on the first landing to take breath.

"What's the matter with you--ain't you well?" asked the servant-maid.

"No, I ain't--I'm just the tother thing."

"Been ill?"

"Scarlet fever--that's all."

"Oh! lor a mussy on us!--keep further off! I can't bide fevers. We shall
all be as red as lobsters in the morning."

"It ain't catching now--Mother Watts didn't catch it--I wish she had!"

"Will you go up-stairs now?"

"Let's get a breath--I ain't so strong as I used to be--now then."

Up the next flight, to the door of the first-floor front, where Sidney
Hinchford, pale with suspense, was standing.

"Have you got it?--have you got it, Mattie?"

"No--I ain't got nothin'."

"'Cept a fever, Master Sidney--tell your father to look out."

A thin, large-veined hand protruded from the door, and dragged Master
Hinchford suddenly backwards into the room; a tall, military-looking old
gentleman, with white hair and white moustache, the instant afterwards
occupied the place, and looked down sternly at the small intruder.

"Keep where you are--I didn't know you had a fever, girl. Ann Packet,
put the light on the bracket. That will do."

Ann Packet set the chamber candlestick on a little bracket outside the
drawing-room, drew her clothes tightly round her limbs, and keeping
close to the wall, scuttled past the girl, whom fever had sorely
stricken lately. Mattie dropped on to the stairs, placed her elbows on
her knees, took her chin between her claw-like hands, and stared up at
Mr. Hinchford.

"I don't think you can catch anythin' from me, guv'nor."

Governor looked down at Mattie, and reddened a little.

"I'm not afraid of fever--it's only the boy I'm thinking about. Sidney,"
he called.

"Yes, pa."

"You can hear, if I leave the door open. Now, girl," addressing the
diminutive figure on the stairs, "if you haven't brought the brooch,
what was the good of coming here?"

"To let you know I tried--that's all. I thought that all you might think
that I'd stuck to it, you see. But I did try my hardest to get it
back--because the young gent let me off when the bobbies would have
walked me to quod. Lor bless you, sir, I'm not a reg'lar!"

"A what?"

"A reg'lar thief, sir. They've been trying hard to make me--Mother Watts
and old Simes, and the rest--but it don't do. I was locked up once afore
mother died, and mother was sorry--awful sorry, for _her_--you should
have just heard her go on, when I come out agin. Oh! no, I'm not a
reg'lar--I sings about the street for ha'pence, and goes to fairs, and
begs--and so on, but I don't take things werry often. I'm a stray, sir!"

"Ah!--God help you!" murmured the old gentleman.

"I never had no father--and mother's dead now. I'm 'bliged to shift for
myself. And oh! I just was hard up when I tooked the brooch."

"And what became of it?"

"Old Simes stuck to it, sir. I went to him on the werry night after I
had seen Master Hinchford, and he said he'd sold it for tenpence, but
he'd try and get it back for me, which he never did, sir--never."

"No--I suppose not," was the dry response.

"And the next day I caught the fever, and got in the workus, somehow;
and when I came back to Kent Street, last week that was, old Simes had
seen nothin' more of the brooch, and Mother Watts had forgot all about
it--so she said!" was the disparaging comment.

"And you came hither to tell us all this?"

"Yes--I thought you'd like to know I _did_ try, and that they were too
deep for me. My eye! they just are deep, those two!"

"Why didn't you stay in the workhouse?"

"Can't bide the workus, sir--they drop upon you too much. It's the wust
place going, sir, and no one takes to it."

"You're an odd girl."

Mr. Hinchford leaned his back against the door-post, and surveyed the
ragged and forlorn girl on the lower stair. He was perplexed with this
child, and her wistful eyes--keen and glittering as steel--made him feel
uncomfortable. Here was a mystery--a something unaccountable, and he
could not probe to its depths, or tell which was false and which was
genuine in the character of this motherless girl before him. He had
prided himself all his life in being a judge of character--a man of
observation, who saw the flaw in the diamond--the real face behind the
paint, varnish, and pasteboard. He had judged his own brother in times
past--he had mixed much with the world, and gleaned much from hard
experience thereof, and yet a child like this disturbed him. He fancied
that he could read a struggle for something better and more pure in
Mattie's life, and that Fate was against her and drawing her back to the
shadows from which she, as if by a noble instinct, was endeavouring to
emerge.

He felt curious concerning her.

"What do you intend to do now?"

"Lor, sir, I don't know. It depends upon what turns up."

"You will not thieve any more?"

"Not if I can help it--but if I can't help it, sir, I must go to school
at Simes's. He teaches lots of gals to get a living!"

Mr. Hi