# Paracelsus and his Work
Author: Franz Hartmann
Category: 04_hermetismo
Source: Gutenberg #27930
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:20:05.423877
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




David Fleming's Forgiveness, by Margaret Murray Robertson.



CHAPTER ONE.

A CANADIAN SETTLEMENT.

The first tree felled in the wilderness that lay to the south and west
of the range of hills of which Hawk's Head is the highest, was felled by
the two brothers Holt.  These men left the thickly-settled New England
valley where they were born, passed many a thriving town and village,
and crossed over miles and miles of mountain and forest to seek a home
in a strange country.  Not that they thought of it as a strange country,
for it was a long time ago, and little was known by them of limits or
boundary lines, when they took possession of the fertile Canadian valley
which had till then been the resort only of trappers and Indians.  They
were only squatters, that is, they cut down the great trees, and built
log-houses, and set about making farms in the wilderness, with no better
right to the soil than that which their labour gave.  They needed no
better right, they thought; at least, there was no one to interfere with
them, and soon a thriving settlement was made in the valley.  It turned
out well for the Holts and for those who followed them, for after a good
many years their titles to their farms were secured to them on easy
terms by the Canadian Government, but they had held them as their own
from the first.

Within ten years of the coming of the brothers, the cluster of dwellings
rising around the saw-mill which Gershom Holt had built on the Beaver
River--the store, the school-house, the blacksmith's shop--began to be
spoken of by the farmers as "the village."  Every year of the ten that
followed was marked by tokens of the slow but sure prosperity which,
when the settlers have been men of moral lives and industrious habits,
has uniformly attended the planting of the later Canadian settlements.

Gradually the clearings widened around the first log-houses, and the
unsightly "stumps" grew smaller and blacker under the frequent touch of
fire.  The rough "slash fences" made of brushwood and fallen trees, gave
place to the no less ugly, but more substantial "zigzag" of cedar rails.
The low, log farm-houses began to be dwarfed by the great framed barns
which the increasing harvest rendered necessary, until a succession of
such harvests rendered possible and prudent the building of framed
dwellings as well.

As the clearings widened and the farms became more productive, the
prosperity of the village advanced.  A "grist-mill" was added to the
saw-mill, and as every year brought move people to the place, new arts
and industries were established.  The great square house of Gershom
Holt, handsome and substantial, was built.  Other houses were made neat
and pretty with paint, and green window-blinds, and door-yard fences, as
time went on.

Primitive fashions and modes of life which had done for the early days
of the settlement, gave place by degrees to the more artificial
requirements of village society.  The usual homespun suit, which even
the richest had considered sufficient for the year's wear, was
supplemented now by stuffs from other looms than those in the farm-house
garrets.  Housewives began to think of beauty as well as use in their
interior arrangements.  "Boughten" carpets took the place of the yellow
paint and the braided mats once thought the proper thing for the "spare
room" set apart for company, and articles of luxury, in the shape of
high chests of drawers and hard hair-cloth sofas, found their way into
the houses of the ambitious and "well-to-do" among them.  The changes
which increasing means bring to a community were visible in the village
and beyond it before the first twenty years were over.  They were not
all changes for the better, the old people declared; but they still went
on with the years, till Gershom, as the village came to be called, began
to be looked upon by the neighbouring settlements as the centre of
business and fashion to all that part of the country.

The Holts were both rather indifferent as regarded religious matters,
but they had the hereditary respect of their countrymen for "school and
meeting privileges," and they were strong in the belief that the
ultimate prosperity of their community, even in material things,
depended mainly on the growing intelligence and morality of the people;
so it happened that much earlier than is usual in new settlements,
measures were taken to secure the means of secular and religious
instruction for the people.  But it was not merely in material wealth
and prosperity that was evident the progress of which the inhabitants of
Gershom were becoming so justly proud.

As the Holts were the first comers to Gershom, so for a long time they
kept the first place in the town, both in social and in business
matters.  "The Holts had made Gershom," the Holts said, and other people
said it too, only sometimes it was added, that "they had also made
themselves, and that all the pains they had taken had been to that end."
But this was saying too much, for all the Holts had great pride in the
place and its prosperity, and almost all the industries that contributed
to its growth, as time went on, had been commenced by one or other of
them.

Gershom Holt was the more successful of the two brothers, partly because
of his greater energy and capacity for business, and partly because he
had "located" at that point on the Beaver River where the water-power
could be made easily available for manufacturing purposes.  No time was
lost by him in doing what skill and will could do with only limited
capital to make a beginning in that direction, and every new artisan who
came to the town, and did well for himself in it, did something to
increase the wealth of Gershom Holt also.  So in course of time he
became the rich man of the place.  He dealt closely in business matters,
he liked the best of a bargain, and, as a rule, got it; but he was of a
kindly nature, and was never hard to the poor, and many a man in Gershom
was helped to a first start in business through his means, so that he
was better liked and more entirely trusted than the one rich man in a
rising country place is apt to be.

His brother Reuben was not so fortunate, either in making money or in
winning favours.  His farm bordered on the river, but the meadows were
narrow, and the land rose abruptly into round rocky hills, fit only for
pasture.  Beyond the hills, on the higher level, the land was fairly
good, but the cultivation of it was difficult, and he had never done
much with it.  He was neither strong nor courageous.  Some of his
children died, and others "went wrong," and he fell into misanthropic
ways, and for several years before his death he was seldom seen in the
village.

For more than twenty years the Beaver River settlement, as it was at
first called, was occupied by people of American origin who had come in
with the Holts, or had followed after them.  But about the time when the
land of which they had taken possession was secured to them by the
Government, a number of Scotch families came to settle in that part of
the town called North Gore, lying just under the morning shadows of
Hawk's Range.  To these people, for whose land and ancestry they had a
traditional admiration and respect, the descendants of the Pilgrim
Fathers extended a warm welcome, and it was called a good day for the
town when they settled down in it.

With the best intentions on the part of all concerned, affairs will go
wrong in the history of towns as well as of individuals.  Unhappily the
new settlers were not at first brought into contact with the best and
kindest of the people.  Some of them suffered in purse, not from "bad
men," but from men whose easy consciences did not refuse to take
advantage of their necessities, and of their ignorance of the country
and its ways; and some of them suffered in their feelings from what they
believed to be curiosity and "meddlesomeness" on the part of neighbours,
who in reality meant to be helpful and friendly.

So the North Gore folk "kept themselves to themselves" as they expressed
it, and struggled on through some hard years, which more friendliness
with their neighbour; might have made easier.  The old settlers watched
with an interest, on the whole kindly, the patient labour, the untiring
energy which did not always take the shortest way to success, but which
made its ultimate attainment sure.  But to them the firm adherence of
the Scotchmen to their own opinions and plans and modes of life, looked
like obstinacy and ignorance, and they spoke of them as narrow and
bigoted, and altogether behind the times, and the last charge was the
most serious in their estimation.

The new-comers refused to see anything admirable in the ease and
readiness with which most of the old settlers, disciplined by necessity,
could turn from one occupation to another, as circumstances required.
The farmer who made himself a carpenter to-day and a shoemaker to-morrow
was, in their estimation, a "Jack-of-all-trades," certainly not a farmer
in the dignified sense which they had been accustomed to attach to the
name.

The strong and thrifty Scotchwomen, who thought little of walking and
carrying great baskets of butter and eggs the three or four miles that
lay between North Gore and the village, found matter for contemptuous
animadversion in the glimpses they got of their neighbours' way of life,
and spoke scornfully to each other of the useless "Yankee" wives, who
were content to bide within doors while their husbands did not only the
legitimate field-work, but the work of the garden, and even the milking
of the cows as well.  The "Yankee" wives in their turn shrugged their
shoulders at the thought of what the housekeeping must be that was left
to children, or left altogether, while the women were in the hay or
harvest-field as regularly and almost as constantly as their husbands
and brothers.  Of course they did not speak their minds to one another
about all this, but they knew enough about one another's opinions to
make them suspicious and shy when they met.

And they did not meet often.  The mistress of a new farm found little
time for visiting.  Winter had its own work, and the snow and the bitter
cold kept them within doors.  When winter was over they could only think
how best to turn to account the long days of the short Canadian summer
for the subduing of the soil, out of which must come food for their
hungry little ones.  Every foot reclaimed from the swamp or the forest,
every unsightly thing burned out of the rough, new land, meant store of
golden grain and wholesome bread for the future.  So, with brave hearts
and willing hands, the North Gore women laboured out of doors as well as
within, content to wait for the days when only the legitimate woman's
work should fall to their share.  There were some exceptions, of course,
and friendly relations were established between individuals, and between
families, in the North Gore and the village; but a friendly feeling was
for a good many years by no means general, and two distinct communities
lived side by side in the town of Gershom.

Even the good people among them--God's own people--who have so much in
common that all lesser matters may well be made nothing of between
them--even they did not come together across the wall which ignorance
and prejudice and circumstances had raised.  At least they did not for a
time.  The Grants and the Scotts and the Sangsters travelled Sabbath by
Sabbath the four miles between the North Gore and the village, and,
passing the house where a good man preached the Gospel in the name of
the Lord Jesus, travelled four miles further still for the sake of
hearing one of their own kirk and country preach the same Gospel in the
name of the same Lord.  And so the Reverend Mr Hollister, and Deacon
Moses Turner, and other good men among them, thought themselves
justified in setting them down as narrow-minded and bigoted, and
incapable of appreciating the privileges which had fallen to their lot.

There was really no good reason why they should not all have worshipped
together as one community, for in the doctrines which they held, the
descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers differed little from those who had
been taught in Scottish kirks the truth for which their fathers had
fought and died.  The little band who kept together, and held to the
form of church government which they had learned to revere in their
native land, were by reason of their isolation, practically as
independent in regard to the matters of their kirk as were their Puritan
neighbours who claimed this independence as their right.

In point of numbers, and in point of means, the older settlers were the
stronger of the two parties; in point of character and piety, even they
themselves were not sure that the superiority was on their side.
However that might be, all felt that the coming in among them of the
North Gore men and their families was much to be desired, and after a
time measures were taken to bring the subject of union before them in
the most favourable manner.

So, accompanied and encouraged by Deacon Turner, Mr Hollister, the
minister, visited the North Gore folk family by family, and was
respectfully and kindly received by them all, but he did not make much
progress in the good work he had undertaken.  His remarks about
brotherly love and the healing of breaches were for the most part
listened to in silence, and so were Deacon Turner's cautious allusions
to the subscription-list for the dealing with current expenses.  Nowhere
did they meet with much encouragement to hope that their efforts to
bring the two communities together would be successful.  For several
years after this the North Gore folk continued to make their
"Sabbath-day's journey" past the village church.  Then for a while they
had the monthly ministrations of a preacher of their own order in their
own neighbourhood, and on other days kept up meetings among themselves,
and did what they could in various ways to keep themselves to themselves
as of old.

But time wrought changes.  The children who had come to the North Gore
grew up, and they did not grow up to be just such men and women as their
fathers and mothers had been.  It is not necessary to say whether they
were worse men or better.  They were different.  There was not much
change in the manner of life in many of the homes.  The Sabbath was as
strictly kept, and the young people were as strictly taught and
catechised and looked after in Scottish fashion as of old, and they bade
fair to grow up as cautious and as "douce," and as much attached to old
ways and customs as if they had been brought up on the other side of the
sea, quite beyond the reach of Yankee innovations and free-and-easy
colonial ways.  But even the most "douce" and cautious amongst them were
without the stiffness and strength of the old-time prejudice, and the
young people of the different sections of the township, brought together
in the many pleasant ways that are open to young people in country
places, no longer kept apart as their fathers had done.

There were troubles in Gershom still of various kinds, misunderstandings
and quarrels, and violations of the golden rule between individuals and
between families, and some of them took colour, and some of them took
strength, from national feeling and national prejudice; but there were
no longer two distinct communities living side by side in the town, as
there once had been.  And by and by, when old Mr Grant and Deacon
Turner, and some others of the good men who had held with one or other
of them on earth, were gone to sit down to eat bread together in the
kingdom of heaven, the good men they had left behind them drew closer
together by slow degrees.  And when Mr Hollister grew old and feeble,
and unable to do duty as pastor of the village church, all agreed that
the chief consideration, in the appointment of a successor, must be the
getting of such a man as might be able to unite the people of all
sections into one congregation at last.

This was the state of things in Gershom when it began to be whispered
that there was serious trouble arising between Jacob Holt and old Mr
Fleming.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE FLEMINGS.

There were already a good many openings in the North Gore woods when the
Flemings took possession of the partially cleared farm lying half-way
between it and the village, at a little distance from the road.  They
built on it a house of grey, unhewn stone, long and low like the home
they had "left on the other side of the sea."  They called the place
Ythan Brae, and the clear shallow brook that ran down from their rocky
pastures, through the swamp to Beaver River, they called the Ythan Burn
because the familiar names were pleasant on their lips and in their ears
in a strange land; but it was a long time before it seemed like home to
them.

For a while the neighbours knew about them only what could be learned
from the fields visible from the North Gore road.  That Mr Fleming had
experience, tireless industry, and some money, three things to insure
success in his calling, the canny Scotch farmers were not slow to
perceive in the change that gradually came over the once-neglected land.
Mr Fleming seemed a grave, silent man, with the traces of some severe
trouble showing in his face.  And this trouble his wife had shared, for,
though she was still a young woman when she came to Gershom, there were
streaks of white in her brown hair, and on her fair, serene face there
was the look which "tells of sorrow meekly borne."  The gloom and
sternness which sometimes made people shrink from coming in contact with
her husband was never seen in her.

The eldest of their two sons was almost a man when they came to live at
Ythan Brae.  He was a quiet, well-doing lad, reserved like his father,
but pleasant-spoken and friendly like his mother.  His brother Hugh had
inherited his mother's good looks and sunny temper, and he had, besides,
the power which does not always accompany the possession of personal
beauty or cleverness--the power of winning love.

Long afterward, when the mention of Hugh's name was a sorrowful matter,
the people of the North Gore who knew him best used to speak of him with
a kind of wonder.  He was such "a bonny laddie," with eyes like stars,
and even at sixteen a head above his elder brother.  He was so blithe
and kindly, and clever too.  According to these people there was nothing
he could not do, and nothing that he would not trouble himself to do to
give pleasure to his friends.  He was "the apple of his father's eye,"
the delight of his life; and that his mother's heart did not break when
she lost him, was only because, even at the worst of times, God's grace
is sufficient for help and healing to those who stay themselves on Him.

For Hugh "went wrong."  Oh, sorrowful words! seeming so little and
meaning so much: care and fear, watching and waiting, sleepless nights
and days of dread to those who looked on with no power to bring him back
again.  How he went wrong may be easily guessed.  He had been led astray
by evil companions his mother always said.  Not that to her knowledge,
or to the knowledge of any one, he had gone so very far astray till the
end came.  There had been doubts and fears for him, and earnest
expostulations from those who loved him, but it was a great shock and
surprise to all the countryside when it came to be known that he had
gone away never to return.

What he had done was certainly known only to two or three.  There were
whispers of forgery, and even robbery, and some said it was only debt,
which his father refused to pay.  There were others involved in the
matter, and it was kept quiet.  Some of the young Holts were among the
number.  Jacob, Gershom's eldest son, went away for a while.  It was not
known whether they had gone together, but Jacob soon came home again,
and as far as he was concerned, everything was as before.

But after a time there came heavy tidings to Ythan Brae.  Hugh Fleming
was dead--in the very flower of his youth--"with all his sins on his
head;" his father cried out in the agony of the knowledge.  There was
only a word or two in a strange handwriting to say that, after sharp and
sudden illness, he had died among strangers.

The father and mother lived through the time that followed.  How they
lived none knew, for they were alone at the Brae.  They never passed the
bounds of their own farm through all that terrible winter, and the
neighbours, who sometimes went to see them, as a general thing only saw
Mrs Fleming.  She stood between her husband and the sorrowful
curiosity, the real but painful sympathy which he could not have borne--
which even she found it so hard to bear.  Neither then, nor in all the
years that followed, did any one but his boy's mother hear him utter his
boy's name.  They lived through it, but that winter was like the "valley
of the shadow of death" to them both.

When spring came, the worst was over, the neighbours said, and in one
way so it was.  Their son James brought his wife home to live with them,
and they settled down to their changed life, making the best of it.
Mrs Fleming's cheerfulness came back in the midst of many cares, for
her son's wife was a delicate woman, and the little children came fast
to their home.  Mrs Fleming governed the household still, and in a
sense began life anew in their midst.

But after his son came to live with them, Mr Fleming gave up to him all
that part of their affairs that would have taken him away from home.  He
was a born farmer; his forefathers had been farmers for as many
generations as he could trace, and he had a hereditary reverence for
mother earth as the giver of bread to man.  He took pleasure in the work
of the farm, labouring patiently and cheerfully to bring it to the
highest productiveness which the soil and the variable Canadian climate
would permit.  Hollows were filled and heights were levelled, and the
wide stretch of lowland on either side of the Burn near its mouth, was
year by year made to yield.  A road or two to be cleared and drained and
tilled, and one might have travelled a summer day through the fine
farming country without seeing a finer farm than he made it at last.

And all this time the farm, with his interest in it and his labour on
it, was doing a good work for him, and he grew to love the place as his
home, and the home of the little children who were growing up about him.

But just as a tranquil gloaming seemed to be closing over their
changeful day of life, a new and heavy sorrow fell upon them.  Their son
James died, and the two old people found themselves left alone to care
for his delicate widow and her fatherless children.  Other troubles
followed closely on this.  James Fleming had never been a worldly-wise
man, and he died in debt.  Some of the claims were just, some of them
were doubtful, none of them could have held against his father.  But the
old man gave not a moment's hearing to those who made this suggestion.
The honour of his son's name and memory was at stake, and in his haste
and eagerness to settle all, and because he had so fallen out of
business ways, the best and wisest plans were not taken in the
arrangement of his affairs.

When the time of settlement came, it was found that most of the claims
against James Fleming had passed into the hands of the Holts.  It was
Jacob alone who was to be dealt with, for his father was an old man, and
his connection with the business had long been merely nominal.  Jacob
Holt had changed since the days when he had been, as Hugh Fleming's
father firmly believed, the ruin of his son.  He had changed from an
ill-doing, idle lad, into a man, noted even in that busy community for
his attention to business, a man who took pains to seek a fair
reputation for honesty and generosity among his fellow-townsmen.  But
Mr Fleming liked the man as little as he had liked the lad, and it
added much to the misery of his indebtedness that his obligation was to
him.  He was growing an old man, conscious of his increasing weakness
and inability to cope with difficulties, and he believed his "enemy," as
he called him, to be capable of taking advantage of these.  His faith
failed him sometimes, and in his anxiety and unhappiness, he uttered
harder words than he knew.

Everybody in Gershom knew of his debt, but no one knew what made the
bitterness of his indebtedness to the old man.  The part which Jacob
Holt had had in the trouble, that had come on him through his son, had
never been clearly understood, and was now well-nigh forgotten in the
place.  But the father had not forgotten it.  He would gladly have
mortgaged his farm, or even have given up half of it altogether, to any
friend who could have advanced him the money to pay his debt, but no
such friend was at hand, and it ended, as all knew it must end, in a
seven years' mortgage being taken by Jacob Holt, and the only thing the
old man could do now was to keep silence and hope for better days.

The little Flemings were growing up healthy and happy, a great comfort
and a great care to their grandparents.  They were bright and pretty
children, and good children on the whole, the neighbours said, and they
said also, that there seemed to be no reason why the last days of the
old people should not be contented and comfortable, notwithstanding
their burden of debt.  For the Holts would never be hard on such old
neighbours, and as the boys grew up, to take the weight of the farm-work
on them, the debt might be paid, and all would go well.  This was the
hopeful view of the matter taken by Mrs Fleming also, but the old man
always listened in silence to such words.

When five years had past, no part of the debt had yet been paid.  Even
the interest had been in part paid with borrowed money, and there were
other signs and tokens that the Flemings were going back in the world.
It was not to be wondered at; for Mr Fleming was an old man, and the
greater part of the farm-work had to be done by hired help, at a cost
which the farm could ill bear.  And the chances were, that for a while
at least the state of affairs would be worse rather than better.

Then there came to Mr Fleming this proposal from Jacob Holt.  If
twenty-five acres of the swampy land that bordered the Beaver River just
where the brook fell into it were given up to him the mortgage should be
cancelled, and the debt should be considered paid.  He declared that the
proposal was made solely in the interest of the Fleming family, and
there were a good many people in Gershom who believed him.

To this proposal, however, Mr Fleming returned a prompt and brief
refusal.  He said little about it, but it was known that he believed
evil of Jacob Holt with regard to the matter, and though he kept
silence, others spoke.  The North Gore people took the matter up, and so
did the people of the village.  Mr Fleming had friends in both sections
of the town, and some of them did not spare hard words in the
discussion.

Jacob Holt was now the rich man of Gershom, one of the chief supporters
of the church and of every good cause encouraged in the town, and all
this did not promise well for the union in church matters so earnestly
desired by many good people in Gershom.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE HOLTS.

Gershom Holt was to all appearance a hale old man, but for a long time
before this he had had little to do with the management of the business
of Holt and Son.  He still lived in the great square house which had
succeeded the log-house built by him in the early days of the
settlement.  Two of his children lived with him--Elizabeth, the youngest
child of his first wife, and Clifton, the only child of his second wife,
who had died in giving him birth.

Elizabeth was good, pretty, and clever, and still single at twenty-four.
The persons she loved best in the world were her father and her younger
brother.  Her father loved and trusted her entirely, and every passing
day made him more dependent on her for comfort and for counsel; for he
was a very old man, and in many ways needed the care which it was his
daughter's first duty and pleasure to give.  Her brother loved and
trusted her too in his way, but he was only a lad, and too well
contented with himself and his life to know the value of her love as
yet, and she was not without anxious thoughts about him.  He was
supposed to be distinguishing himself in a New England College as he had
before distinguished himself in the High-School of the village, and only
spent his vacations at home.

There was a difference of nearly twenty years in the ages of Gershom
Holt's two sons, and they had little in common except their father's
name.  Elizabeth loved them both, and respected the youngest most.
Jacob was a little afraid of his sister, and took pains to be on the
best of terms with her, and he could not forget sometimes in her
presence that he had done some things in his life which he was glad she
did not know.

He had married, early in life, a pretty, commonplace woman, who had
grown thin and querulous in the years that had passed since then, and
who was not at all fitted to be the great lady of Gershom, as the rich
man's wife might have been.  That place was filled by Elizabeth, who
filled it well and enjoyed it.

With its large garden and orchard, and its sloping lawn, shaded by trees
beginning to look old and venerable beside those of more recent growth
in the village street, the old square house looked far more like the
great house of the village than the finer mansion lately built by Jacob
further up the hill.  Under Elizabeth's direction it had been modernised
and beautified by the throwing out of a bow-window and the addition of a
wide veranda on two sides.  Everything about it, without and within,
indicated wealth moderately used, for comfort and not for display.  It
was the pleasantest house in the village to visit at, everybody said;
for the squire--so old Mr Holt was generally called--was very
hospitable, and all sorts of people were made welcome there.

There were by this time people in Gershom who had outlived the
remembrance of the days when all the settlers, rich and poor alike, were
socially on a level, and who spoke smoothly and loftily about "station"
and "position" and "the working classes," but the young Holts were not
among them.  Elizabeth and Clifton deserved less credit than was given
them on account of their unassuming and agreeable manners with the
village people, for they did not need to assert themselves as some
others did.  Miss Elizabeth, for all her unpretending ways, was the
great lady of the village, and liked it, and very likely would have
resented it had a rival appeared to call her right in question.

The Holts of the Hill were, in most respects, very different from the
Holts of the village.  They lived and worked and dressed and conducted
themselves generally very much as they had been used to do in the early
days of the settlement.  The old man had been long dead, and his widow
and her two daughters lived on the farm.  One of the daughters was a
childless widow, Betsey, the other had never married.  "A good woman
with an uncertain temper," was the character which many of her friends
would have given her, and some of them might have added that she had had
a hard life and many cares, and no wonder that she was a little hard and
sour after all she had passed through.  But this was by no means all
that could be said of Miss Betsey.

There was little intercourse between the Holts of the Hill and the
village Holts, and it was not the fault of Elizabeth.  It was Betsey who
decidedly withdrew from any intimacy with her cousins.  She was too
old-fashioned, too "set" in her way to fall in with all their new
notions, she said, and from the time that Elizabeth came home from
school to be the mistress of her father's house, and the most popular
person in Gershom, she had had but little to do with her.  It hurt
Elizabeth that it should be so, for she respected her cousin and would
have loved her, and would doubtless have profited--by their intercourse
if it had been permitted.  But she never got beyond a certain point in
the intimacy with her, at least she did not for a time.

The Hill Holts were much respected in the neighbourhood, and Miss Betsey
exerted an influence in its way almost as great as did Miss Elizabeth.
One or two persons who knew them both well, said they were very much
alike, though to people generally they seemed in temper, in tastes, and
in manner of life as different as well could be.  They were alike and
they were different, and the chief difference lay in this, that Miss
Betsey was growing old and had passed through troubles in her time, and
Miss Elizabeth was young and had most of her troubles before her.

The village of Gershom Centre, as it was called, at this time lay
chiefly on the north bank of the Beaver River.  Its principal street ran
north and south at right angles to the river, and the village houses
clustered closest at the end of the bridge that crossed it.  At the
south end of the bridge another street turned west down the river, and
at a little distance became a pleasant country road which led to the
hill-farm of the Holts, and past it to the neighbouring township of
Fosbrooke.  Another street went east, on the north side of the river a
few hundred yards, and then turned north to the Scotch settlement at the
Gore.

On this street, before it turned north, the new church stood.  There was
a wide green common before it, shaded by young trees, and only the
inclosing fence and the road lay between this and the river, which was
broad and shallow, and flowed softly in this part of its course.  The
church was a very pretty one of its kind--white as snow, with
large-paned windows, and green Venetian blinds.  It had a tall slender
spire, in which hung the first bell that had ever wakened the echoes in
that part of the country for miles around, and of the church and the
bell, and the pretty tree-shaded common before it, the Gershom people
were not a little proud.

Behind the church lay the graveyard, already a populous place, as the
few tall monuments and the many less pretentious slabs of grey or white
stone showed.  It was inclosed by a white fence tipped with black, and
shaded by many young trees, and it was a quiet and pleasant place.
Between the church and the graveyard was a long row of wooden sheds.
They were not ornamental, quite the contrary; but they were very useful
as a shelter for the horses of the church-goers who came from a
distance, and they had been added by way of conciliating the North Gore
people when one and another of them began to come to the village church.

Toward the church one fair Sabbath morning in June, many Gershom people
were hastening.  Already there were vehicles of great variety in the
sheds, and horses were tied here and there along the fences under the
trees.  There were groups of people lingering in Gershom fashion on the
church steps and on the grass, and the numbers, and the air of
expectation over all, indicated that the occasion was one of more than
usual interest.  All Gershom had turned out hoping to see and hear the
new minister, whose coming was to bean assurance of peace to the church
and to the congregation.  They were to be disappointed for that day,
however, for the minister had not come.  Squire Holt and his son and
daughter came with the rest.  The old man lingered at the gate
exchanging greetings with his neighbours, and the young people went on
toward the door.

"Gershom is the place after all, Lizzie," said her brother.  "It is
pleasant to see all the folks again.  But I don't believe I'm going to
stay to see Jacob through this business.  Well! never mind, Lizzie," he
added, as his sister looked grave.  "I'll see you through, if you say
so.  And here come Ben and Cousin Betsey; let us wait and speak to
them."

"Clifton," said his sister, earnestly, "Ben is Cousin Betsey's best hand
this summer.  It won't do to beguile him from his work, dear.  You must
not try it."

"Nonsense, Elizabeth.  It is rather soon to come down on a fellow like
that, before I have even spoken to him.  I never made Ben idle, quite
the contrary."

Coming slowly up the green slope between the gate and the church were
the two persons recognised by Clifton as Ben and Cousin Betsey.  They
moved along in a leisurely way, nodding to one and speaking to another,
so that there was time to discuss them as they approached.

"Lizzie," said her brother, "do you suppose you'll ever come to look
like Cousin Betsey?"

"I am quite sure I shall never wear such a bonnet," said Elizabeth,
pettishly.  "Why will she make a fright of herself?"

"It is as an offset to you--so fine as you are," said Clifton, laughing.
"She had that gown before Ben was born; I remember it perfectly."

Miss Betsey Holt was a striking-looking person, notwithstanding the
oddness and shabbiness of her dress.  Scantiness is a better word for it
than shabbiness, for her dress was of good material, neat and well
preserved, but it was without a superfluous fold or gather, and in those
days, when, even in country places, crinoline was beginning to assert
itself, she did look ludicrously straight and stiff.  Miss Elizabeth's
dress was neither in material nor make of the fashion that had its
origin in the current year, and city people, wise in such matters, might
have set them both down as old-fashioned.  But in appearance, as they
drew near one another, there was a great contrast between them, though
in feature there was a strong resemblance.

There was more than fifteen years' difference in their ages, and Betsey
looked older than her forty years.  She was above the middle height,
thin and dark and wrinkled, and there were white streaks in the brown
hair brought down low and flat upon the cheek, but in every feature the
bright youthful beauty of the girl had once been hers.  Some of the
neighbours, who were regarding them as they met, would have said that
once Miss Betsey had been much handsomer than ever Miss Elizabeth would
be.  For Miss Betsey had been young at a time when there was little
danger that indolence or self-indulgence could injure the full
development of healthful beauty, and as yet Miss Elizabeth had fallen on
easy days, and was languid at times, and delicate, and if the truth must
be told, a little discontented with what life had as yet brought her,
and a little afraid of what might lie before her, and there was a shadow
of this on her fair face to-day.

They had not much to say to each other, and they stood in silence
watching the two lads.  Clifton was considered in Gershom to have
learned very fine manners, since he went to college, but he had
forgotten them for the moment, and was as boyish and natural as his less
sophisticated cousin.  They were only second cousins, Ben being the only
child of Reuben Holt's eldest son, who had died early.  His Aunt Betsey
had brought the boy up, and "had not had the best of luck in doing it,"
she sometimes told him; but he was the dearest person in the world to
her, for all her pretended discontent with her success.  She watched the
two lads as they went into the eager discussion of something that
pleased them, and so did Elizabeth, for it was a pleasant sight to see.

"Cousin," said Elizabeth, gently, "I do not think you need fear that my
boy will harm yours."

"I am not afraid--not much.  Ben is the stronger of the two, morally, if
he isn't so bright.  My boy is to be trusted," and she looked as though
she would have added, "that is more than you can say for yours."

Elizabeth looked grave.

"Cousin Betsey, you were always hard on my brother Clifton."

Betsey shrugged her shoulders.

"You are harder on him this minute than I am.  I don't suppose he has
done anything very bad this time--worse than usual, I mean."

"Have you heard anything?  Did you know he was sent home?" asked
Elizabeth in dismay.

"He sent a letter to Ben a spell ago, and I saw it lying round.  You
needn't tell him so.  If it is as he says, there aint much wrong this
time.  Here is Hepsey Bean."

Miss Bean had come to inquire if anything had been heard of the
minister, but the cousins were too much occupied in watching the two
lads to answer her, and Hepsey's eyes followed theirs.

"Are not they alike as two peas?" said she.  "Not their fixings exactly,
I don't mean--"

Miss Elizabeth laughed, even Miss Betsey smiled, touched with a grim
sense of humour as she regarded the lads.  Their "fixings" were
certainly different.  Everything, from the tips of Clifton's shining
boots to the crown of his shining hat, declared him to be a dandy.  His
collar, necktie, coat, and all the rest, were in the latest fashion--a
fashion a sight of which, but for his coming home, the Gershom people
might not have been favoured with for a year to come.  His compulsory
departure from the seat of learning had been delayed while the tailor
completed his summer outfit, so that there could be no mistake about his
"fixings."

As for Ben, he was fine also, in a new suit of homespun, which, since it
came from the loom, and, indeed, before it went to the loom, had passed
through no hands but those of his Aunt Betsey.  It was not handsome.
The home-made thick grey cloth of the country, which the farmers' wives
of those days took pride in preparing for the winter-wear of their "men
folks," was an article of superior wearing qualities, and handsome in
its way.  But it was the half-cotton fabric, dingy and napless,
considered good enough for summer wear, in which Ben was arrayed.  Made
as a loose frock and overall to be worn in the hay-field, or following
the plough, it was well enough; but made into a tight-fitting
Sunday-suit, it was not handsome, certainly.  As far as "fixings" were
concerned, the cousins were a contrast.  Betsey looked and laughed
again, but Elizabeth did not laugh.  She knew that Cousin Betsey was
sensitive where Ben was concerned.

"Clothes don't amount to much anyway," said Betsey.  "Hepsey's right.
They are alike as two peas, but Ben is the strongest morally, because he
hasn't been spoiled by property, as Clifton has.  Not that he is
altogether spoiled yet."

"But about the minister?" interrupted Miss Bean.

"He has not come, it seems," said Elizabeth.  "There is to be a sermon
read to-day," but she did not say that her brother Jacob was to read it.

The bell which had been delayed beyond the usual time pealed out, and
all faces were turned to the church door.  Clifton and Ben lingered till
the last.

"There is old Mr Fleming going off home," said Ben as he caught sight
of a figure on horseback turning the corner toward North Gore.  "I
expect he don't care about your brother Jacob's preaching," he added,
gravely.

"Isn't it his practice he don't care about?" said Clifton, laughing.

"I shouldn't wonder," said Ben.

"Well, I can't say I care much about his preaching either.  Come, Ben,
let us go down to the big elm and talk things over."

Ben shook his head, but followed.

"It is not just the same as if the minister was there," said he,
doubtfully.

"But then what will Aunt Betsey say?"

"Oh, she won't care since it's only Jacob.  And she needn't know it."

"Oh, she's got to know it.  But it is not any worse for us than for old
Mr Fleming.  It's pleasant down here."

It was pleasant.  The largest elm tree in Gershom grew on the river
bank, and its great branches stretched far over to the other side,
making cool shadows on the rippling water.  The place was green and
still, "a great deal more like Sunday than the inside of the
meeting-house," Clifton declared.  But Ben shook his head.

"That's one of the loose notions you've learned at college.  Your sister
believes in going to meetings, and so does Aunt Betsey."

So did Clifton it seemed, for there was a good deal more said after
that, and they quite agreed that whether it was altogether agreeable or
not, it was quite right that people generally should go to church,
rather than to the river, as they had done.  How it happened, Ben hardly
knew, but in a little while they found themselves in Seth Fairweather's
boat, and were paddling up the river, out and in among the shadows, past
the open fields and the cedar swamp to the point where the Ythan Burn
fell into the Beaver.  They paddled about a while upon the Pool, as a
sudden widening of the channel of the river was called, till the heat of
the sun sent them in among the shadows again.  Then Clifton leaned back
at his ease, while Ben waved about a branch of odorous cedar to keep the
little black flies away.

"Now tell me all about it, Cliff," said he.

Clifton winced, but put a bold face on the matter, and told in as few
words as possible the story of his having been sent home.  It was not a
pleasant story to tell, though he had been less to blame than some
others who had escaped punishment altogether.  But sitting there in the
shadow of the cedars, with Ben's great eyes upon him, he felt more sorry
and ashamed, and more angry at himself, and those who had been concerned
with him in his folly, than ever he had felt before.

"The fun didn't pay that time, did it, Cliff?" said Ben.  "I don't
believe it ever does--that kind of fun."

"That's what Aunt Betsey says, eh?" said Clifton.  "Well, she's about
right."

"And you'll never do so, any more; will you, Cliff?"

Clifton laughed.

"But, Cliff, you are almost a man now, you are a man, and it don't pay
in the long run to drink and have a good time.  It didn't pay in my
father's case, and Aunt Betsey says--"

"There, that will do.  I would rather hear Aunt Betsey's sermons from
her own lips, and I am going up to the Hill some time soon."

There was silence between them for a little while, then Ben said:

"There's a meeting up in the Scott school-house 'most every Sunday
afternoon, Cliff; suppose we go up there, and then I can tell Aunt
Betsey all about it."

Clifton had no objections to this plan; so pushing the boat in among the
bushes that hung low over the water, they left it there and took their
way by the side of Ythan Burn.  But he would not be hurried.  As a boy
he had liked more than anything else in the world, loitering through the
fields and woods with Ben, and it gave him great satisfaction to
discover that he had not outgrown this liking.  He forgot his fine
manners and fine clothes, his college friends and pleasures and
troubles; and Ben forgot Aunt Betsey, and that he was doing wrong, and
they wandered on as they had done hundreds of times before.

For though no one, not even his Aunt Betsey, thought Ben very bright,
Clifton would have taken his word about beast and bird and creeping
thing, and about all the growing life in the woods, rather than the word
of any other ten in Gershom.  They made no haste, there fore, in the
direction of the Scott school-house, but wound in and out among the wood
paths, using eyes and ears in the midst of the rejoicing life of which
the forest was so full at that June season.

They kept along the side of the brook, and by and by came out of the
woods on the edge of the fine strip of land which old Mr Fleming had
made foot by foot from the swamp.  There was no finer land in the
township, none that had been more faithfully dealt with than this.  Ben
uttered an exclamation of admiration as he looked over it to the hill
beyond.  Even Clifton, who knew less and cared less about land than he
did, sympathised with his admiration.

"He might mow it now, and have a second crop before fall," said Ben,
with enthusiasm.  "It would be a shame to spoil so fine a meadow by
building a factory on it, wouldn't it?"

"It would spoil it for hay, but factories are not bad in a place, I tell
you.  It might be a good thing to put one here."

"Not for Mr Fleming.  He don't care for factories.  He made the meadow
out of the swamp, and nobody else has any business with it, whatever
they may say about mortgages and things."

"But who is talking about mortgages and things?" asked Clifton,
laughing.

"Oh, most everybody in Gershom is talking.  I don't know much about it
myself.  And Jacob's one of your folks, and you'd be mad if I told you
all that folks say."

Clifton laughed.

"Jacob isn't any more one of my folks than you are--nor so much.  Do you
suppose I would stay away from meeting to come out here with Jacob?  Not
if I know it."

"He wouldn't want you to, I don't suppose."

"Not he.  He doesn't care half so much about me as you do."

"No, he don't.  I think everything of you.  And that's why Aunt Betsey
says you ought to be careful to set me a good example."

"That's so," said Clifton, laughing.  "Now tell me about old Fleming."

Ben never had the power of refusing to do what his cousin asked him, but
he had little to tell that Clifton had not heard before.  There was talk
of forming a great manufacturing company in Gershom; but there had been
talk of that since ever Clifton could remember.  The only difference now
was that a new dam was to be built further up the river at a place
better suited for i