# The Kabala of Numbers vol 2
Author: Sepharial
Category: 02_numerologia
Source: Gutenberg #36192
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:18:05.033325
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Al Haines









THE BALKAN WARS

1912-1913


BY

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN





PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS

PRINCETON

LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1914




Copyright, June 1914, December 1914, by

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS


Second Edition

Published December, 1914




{v}

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

The interest in the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913 has exceeded the
expectations of the publishers of this volume.  The first edition,
which was published five months ago, is already exhausted and a second
is now called for.

Meanwhile there has broken out and is now in progress a war which is
generally regarded as the greatest of all time--a war already involving
five of the six Great Powers and three of the smaller nations of Europe
as well as Japan and Turkey and likely at any time to embroil other
countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa, which are already embraced in
the area of military operations.

This War of Many Nations had its origin in the Balkan situation.  It
began on July 28 with the declaration of the Dual Monarchy {vi} to the
effect that from that moment Austria-Hungary was in a state of war with
Servia.  And the fundamental reason for this declaration as given in
the note or ultimatum to Servia was the charge that the Servian
authorities had encouraged the Pan-Serb agitation which seriously
menaced the integrity of Austria-Hungary and had already caused the
assassination at Sarajevo of the Heir to the Throne.

No one could have observed at close range the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913
without perceiving, always in the background and occasionally in the
foreground, the colossal rival figures of Russia and Austria-Hungary.
Attention was called to the phenomenon at various points in this volume
and especially in the concluding pages.

The issue of the Balkan struggles of 1912-1913 was undoubtedly
favorable to Russia.  By her constant diplomatic support she retained
the friendship and earned the gratitude of Greece, Montenegro, and
Servia; and through her {vii} championship, belated though it was, of
the claims of Roumania to territorial compensation for benevolent
neutrality during the war of the Allies against Turkey, she won the
friendship of the predominant Balkan power which had hitherto been
regarded as the immovable eastern outpost of the Triple Alliance.  But
while Russia was victorious she did not gain all that she had planned
and hoped for.  Her very triumph at Bukarest was a proof that she had
lost her influence over Bulgaria.  This Slav state after the war
against Turkey came under the influence of Austria-Hungary, by whom she
was undoubtedly incited to strife with Servia and her other partners in
the late war against Turkey.  Russia was unable to prevent the second
Balkan war between the Allies.  The Czar's summons to the Kings of
Bulgaria and Servia on June 9, 1913, to submit, in the name of
Pan-Slavism, their disputes to his decision failed to produce the
desired effect, while this assumption of Russian hegemony in Balkan
affairs greatly {viii} exacerbated Austro-Hungarian sentiment.  That
action of the Czar, however, was clear notification and proof to all
the world that Russia regarded the Slav States in the Balkans as
objects of her peculiar concern and protection.

The first Balkan War--the war of the Allies against Turkey--ended in a
way that surprised all the world.  Everybody expected a victory for the
Turks.  That the Turks should one day be driven out of Europe was the
universal assumption, but it was the equally fixed belief that the
agents of their expulsion would be the Great Powers or some of the
Great Powers.  That the little independent States of the Balkans should
themselves be equal to the task no one imagined,--no one with the
possible exception of the government of Russia.  And as Russia rejoiced
over the victory of the Balkan States and the defeat of her secular
Mohammedan neighbor, Austria-Hungary looked on not only with amazement
but with disappointment and chagrin.

{ix}

For the contemporaneous diplomacy of the Austro-Hungarian government
was based on the assumption that the Balkan States would be vanquished
by Turkey.  And its standing policy had been on the one hand to keep
the Kingdom of Servia small and weak (for the Dual Monarchy was itself
an important Serb state) and on the other hand to broaden her Adriatic
possessions and also to make her way through Novi Bazar and Macedonia
to Saloniki and the Aegean, when the time came to secure this
concession from the Sultan without provoking a European war.  It seemed
in 1908 as though the favorable moment had arrived to make a first
move, and the Austro-Hungarian government put forward a project for
connecting the Bosnian and Macedonian railway systems.  But the only
result was to bring to an end the co-operation which had for some years
been maintained between the Austrian and Russian governments in the
enforcement upon the Porte of the adoption of reforms in Macedonia.
{x} And now the result of the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913 was the
practical expulsion of Turkey from Europe and the territorial
aggrandizement of Servia and the sister state of Montenegro through the
annexation of those very Turkish domains which lay between the
Austro-Hungarian frontier and the Aegean.  At every point
Austro-Hungarian policies had met with reverses.

Only one success could possibly be attributed to the diplomacy of the
Ballplatz.  The exclusion of Servia from the Adriatic Sea and the
establishment of the independent State of Albania was the achievement
of Count Berchtold, the Austro-Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs.
The new State has been a powder magazine from the beginning, and since
the withdrawal of Prince William of Wied, the government, always
powerless, has fallen into chaos.  Intervention on the part of
neighboring states is inevitable.  And only last month the southern
part of Albania--that is, Northern {xi} Epirus--was occupied by a Greek
army for the purpose of ending the sanguinary anarchy which has
hitherto prevailed.  This action will be no surprise to the readers of
this volume.  The occupation, or rather re-occupation, is declared by
the Greek Government to be provisional and it is apparently approved by
all the Great Powers.  Throughout the rest of Albania similar
intervention will be necessary to establish order, and to protect the
life and property of the inhabitants without distinction of race,
tribe, or creed.  Servia might perhaps have governed the country, had
she not been compelled by the Great Powers, at the instigation of
Austria-Hungary, to withdraw her forces.  And her extrusion from the
Adriatic threw her back toward the Aegean, with the result of shutting
Bulgaria out of Central Macedonia, which was annexed by Greece and
Servia presumably under arrangements satisfactory to the latter for an
outlet to the sea at Saloniki.

The war declared by Austria-Hungary {xii} against Servia may be
regarded to some extent as an effort to nullify in the interests of the
former the enormous advantages which accrued directly to Servia and
indirectly to Russia from the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913.  That Russia
should have come to the support of Servia was as easy to foresee as any
future political event whatever.  And the action of Germany and France
once war had broken out between their respective allies followed as a
matter of course.  If the Austro-German Alliance wins in the War of
Many Nations it will doubtless control the eastern Adriatic and open up
a way for itself to the Aegean.  Indeed, in that event, German trade
and German political influence would spread unchallenged across the
continents from the North Sea to the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.
Turkey is a friend and ally; but even if Turkey were hostile she would
have no strength to resist such victorious powers.  And the Balkan
States, with the defeat of Russia, would be compelled to recognize
Germanic supremacy.

{xiii}

If on the other hand the Allies come out victorious in the War of Many
Nations, Servia and perhaps Roumania would be permitted to annex the
provinces occupied by their brethren in the Dual Monarchy and Servian
expansion to the Adriatic would be assured.  The Balkan States would
almost inevitably fall under the controlling influence of Russia, who
would become mistress of Constantinople and gain an unrestricted outlet
to the Mediterranean through the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmora, and the
Dardanelles.

In spite of themselves the destiny of the peoples of the Balkans is
once more set on the issue of war.  It is not inconceivable, therefore,
that some or all of those States may be drawn into the present colossal
conflict.  In 1912-1913 the first war showed Bulgaria, Greece,
Montenegro, and Servia allied against Turkey; and in the second war
Greece, Montenegro, and Servia were joined by Roumania in the war
against Bulgaria, who was also independently attacked {xiv} by Turkey.
What may happen in 1914 or 1915 no one can predict.  But if this
terrible conflagration, which is already devastating Europe and
convulsing all the continents and vexing all the oceans of the globe,
spreads to the Balkans, one may hazard the guess that Greece,
Montenegro, Servia, and Roumania will stand together on the side of the
Allies and that Bulgaria if she is not carried away by marked
Austro-German victories will remain neutral,--unless indeed the other
Balkan States win her over, as they not inconceivably might do, if they
rose to the heights of unwonted statesmanship by recognizing her claim
to that part of Macedonia in which the Bulgarian element predominates
but which was ceded to her rivals by the Treaty of Bukarest.

But I have said enough to indicate that as in its origin so also in its
results this awful cataclysm under which the civilized world is now
reeling will be found to be vitally connected with the Balkan Wars of
1912-1913.  And I conclude {xv} with the hope that the present volume,
which devotes indeed but little space to military matters and none at
all to atrocities and massacres, may prove helpful to readers who seek
light on the underlying conditions, the causes, and the consequences of
those historic struggles.  The favor already accorded to the work and
the rapid exhaustion of the first edition* seem to furnish some
justification of this hope.

JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN.

_November 26, 1914._


*The present work is rather a reprint than a new edition, few changes
having been made except the correction of typographical errors.




{1}

I

TURKEY AND THE BALKAN STATES

[Illustration: Map: The Balkan Peninsula before the Wars of 1912-1913.]

{3}

I

TURKEY AND THE BALKAN STATES

The expulsion of the Turks from Europe was long ago written in the book
of fate.  There was nothing uncertain about it except the date and the
agency of destiny.



THE TURKISH EMPIRE IN EUROPE

A little clan of oriental shepherds, the Turks had in two generations
gained possession of the whole of the northwest corner of Asia Minor
and established themselves on the eastern shore of the Bosphorus.  The
great city of Brusa, whose groves to-day enshrine the stately beauty of
their mosques and sultans' tombs, capitulated to Orkhan, the son of the
first Sultan, in 1326; and Nicaea, the cradle of the Greek church and
temporary capital of the Greek Empire, {4} surrendered in 1330.  On the
other side of the Bosphorus Orkhan could see the domes and palaces of
Constantinople which, however, for another century was to remain the
seat of the Byzantine Empire.

The Turks crossed the Hellespont and, favored by an earthquake, marched
in 1358 over the fallen walls and fortifications into the city of
Gallipoli.  In 1361 Adrianople succumbed to the attacks of Orkhan's
son, Murad I, whose sway was soon acknowledged in Thrace and Macedonia,
and who was destined to lead the victorious Ottoman armies as far north
as the Danube.

But though the provinces of the corrupt and effete Byzantine Empire
were falling into the hands of the Turks, the Slavs were still
unsubdued.  Lazar the Serb threw down the gauntlet to Murad.  On the
memorable field of Kossovo, in 1389, the opposing forces met--Murad
supported by his Asiatic and European vassals and allies, and Lazar
with his formidable army of {5} Serbs, Bosnians, Albanians, Poles,
Magyars, and Vlachs.  Few battles in the world have produced such a
deep and lasting impression as this battle of Kossovo, in which the
Christian nations after long and stubborn resistance were vanquished by
the Moslems.  The Servians still sing ballads which cast a halo of
pathetic romance round their great disaster.  And after more than five
centuries the Montenegrins continue to wear black on their caps in
mourning for that fatal day.

In the next two centuries the Ottoman Empire moved on toward the zenith
of its glory.  Mohammed II conquered Constantinople in 1453.  And in
1529 Suleyman the Magnificent was at the gates of Vienna.  Suleyman's
reign forms the climax of Turkish history.  The Turks had become a
central European power occupying Hungary and menacing Austria.
Suleyman's dominions extended from Mecca to Buda-Pesth and from Bagdad
to Algiers.  He commanded the Mediterranean, the Euxine, {6} and the
Red Sea, and his navies threatened the coasts of India and Spain.

But the conquests of the Turks were purely military.  They did nothing
for their subjects, whom they treated with contempt, and they wanted
nothing from them but tribute and plunder.  As the Turks were always
numerically inferior to the aggregate number of the peoples under their
sway, their one standing policy was to keep them divided--_divide et
impera_.  To fan racial and religious differences among their subjects
was to perpetuate the rule of the masters.  The whole task of
government, as the Turks conceived it, was to collect tribute from the
conquered and keep them in subjection by playing off their differences
against one another.

But a deterioration of Turkish rulers set in soon after the time of
Suleyman with a corresponding decline in the character and efficiency
of the army.  And the growth of Russia and the reassertion of Hungary,
Poland, and Austria {7} were fatal to the maintenance of an alien and
detested empire founded on military domination alone.  By the end of
the seventeenth century the Turks had been driven out of Austria,
Hungary, Transylvania, and Podolia, and the northern boundaries of
their Empire were fixed by the Carpathians, the Danube, and the Save.
How marked and rapid was the further decline of the Ottoman Empire may
be inferred from the fact that twice in the eighteenth century Austria
and Russia discussed the project of dividing it between them.  But the
inevitable disintegration of the Turkish dominion was not to inure to
the glorification of any of the Great Powers, though Russia certainly
contributed to the weakening of the common enemy.  The decline and
diminution of the Ottoman Empire continued throughout the nineteenth
century.  What happened, however, was the revolt of subject provinces
and the creation out of the territory of European Turkey of the
independent states of Greece, Servia, {8} Roumania, and Bulgaria.  And
it was Bulgarians, Greeks, and Servians, with the active assistance of
the Montenegrins and the benevolent neutrality of the Roumanians, who,
in the war of 1912-1913, drove the Turk out of Europe, leaving him
nothing but the city of Constantinople and a territorial fringe
bordered by the Chataldja line of fortifications.



THE EARLIER SLAV EMPIRES

There is historic justice in the circumstance that the Turkish Empire
in Europe met its doom at the hands of the Balkan nations themselves.
For these nationalities had been completely submerged and even their
national consciousness annihilated under centuries of Moslem
intolerance, misgovernment, oppression, and cruelty.

None suffered worse than Bulgaria, which lay nearest to the capital of
the Mohammedan conqueror.  Yet Bulgaria had had a glorious, if
checkered, history long before there existed {9} any Ottoman Empire
either in Europe or in Asia.  From the day their sovereign Boris
accepted Christianity in 864 the Bulgarians had made rapid and
conspicuous progress in their ceaseless conflicts with the Byzantine
Empire.  The Bulgarian church was recognized as independent by the
Greek patriarch at Constantinople; its primates subsequently received
the title of patriarch, and their see was established at Preslav, and
then successively westward at Sofia, Vodena, Presba, and finally
Ochrida, which looks out on the mountains of Albania.  Under Czar
Simeon, the son of Boris, "Bulgaria," says Gibbon, "assumed a rank
among the civilized powers of the earth."  His dominions extended from
the Black Sea to the Adriatic and comprised the greater part of
Macedonia, Greece, Albania, Servia, and Dalmatia; leaving only to the
Byzantine Empire--whose civilization he introduced and sedulously
promoted among the Bulgarians--the cities of Constantinople, Saloniki,
and Adrianople with {10} the territory immediately surrounding them.
But this first Bulgarian Empire was short-lived, though the western
part remained independent under Samuel, who reigned, with Ochrida as
his capital, from 976 to 1014.  Four years later the Byzantine Emperor,
Basil II, annihilated the power of Samuel, and for a hundred and fifty
years the Bulgarian people remained subject to the rule of
Constantinople.  In 1186 under the leadership of the brothers Asen they
regained their independence.  And the reign of Czar Asen II (1218-1240)
was the most prosperous period of all Bulgarian history.  He restored
the Empire of Simeon, his boast being that he had left to the
Byzantines nothing but Constantinople and the cities round it, and he
encouraged commerce, cultivated arts and letters, founded and endowed
churches and monasteries, and embellished his capital, Trnovo, with
beautiful and magnificent buildings.  After Asen came a period of
decline culminating in a humiliating defeat by the Servians {11} in
1330.  The quarrels of the Christian races of the Balkans facilitated
the advance of the Moslem invader, who overwhelmed the Serbs and their
allies on the memorable field of Kossovo in 1389, and four years later
captured and burned the Bulgarian capital, Trnovo, Czar Shishman
himself perishing obscurely in the common destruction.  For five
centuries Bulgaria remained under Moslem despotism, we ourselves being
the witnesses of her emancipation in the last thirty-five years.

The fate of the Serbs differed only in degree from that of the
Bulgarians.  Converted to Christianity in the middle of the ninth
century, the major portion of the race remained till the twelfth
century under either Bulgarian or Byzantine sovereignty.  But Stephen
Nemanyo brought under his rule Herzegovina, Montenegro, and part of
modern Servia and old Servia, and on his abdication in 1195 in favor of
his son launched a royal dynasty which reigned over the Serb people for
two centuries.  Of {12} that line the most distinguished member was
Stephen Dushan, who reigned from 1331 to 1355.  He wrested the whole of
the Balkan Peninsula from the Byzantine Emperor, and took Belgrade,
Bosnia, and Herzegovina from the King of Hungary.  He encouraged
literature, gave to his country a highly advanced code of laws, and
protected the church whose head--the Archbishop of Ipek--he raised to
the dignity of patriarch.  On Easter Day 1346 he had himself crowned at
Uskub as "Emperor of the Greeks and Serbs."  A few years later he
embarked on an enterprise by which, had he been successful, he might
have changed the course of European history.  It was nothing less than
the capture of Constantinople and the union of Serbs, Bulgarians, and
Greeks into an empire which might defend Christendom against the rising
power of Islam.  Dushan was within forty miles of his goal with an army
of 80,000 men when he died suddenly in camp on the 20th of December,
1355.  Thirty-four years {13} later Dushan's countrymen were
annihilated by the Turks at Kossovo!  All the Slavonic peoples of the
Balkan Peninsula save the brave mountaineers of Montenegro came under
Moslem subjection.  And under Moslem subjection they remained till the
nineteenth century.



TURKISH OPPRESSION OF SLAVS

It is impossible to give any adequate description of the horrors of
Turkish rule in these Christian countries of the Balkans.  Their
people, disqualified from holding even the smallest office, were
absolutely helpless under the oppression of their foreign masters, who
ground them down under an intolerable load of taxation and plunder.
The culminating cruelty was the tribute of Christian children from ten
to twelve years of age who were sent to Constantinople to recruit the
corps of janissaries.  It is not surprising that for the protection of
their wives and children and the safeguarding of their interests the
nobles of Bosnia and the {14} Pomaks of Southeastern Bulgaria embraced
the creed of their conquerors; the wonder is that the people as a whole
remained true to their Christian faith even at the cost of daily
martyrdom from generation to generation.  Their fate too grew worse as
the Turkish power declined after the unsuccessful siege of Vienna in
1683.  For at first Ottoman troops ravaged Bulgaria as they marched
through the land on their way to Austria; and later disbanded soldiers
in defiance of Turkish authority plundered the country and committed
nameless atrocities.  Servia was to some extent protected by her remote
location, but that very circumstance bred insubordination in the
janissaries, who refused to obey the local Turkish governors and gave
themselves up to looting, brigandage, and massacre.  The national
spirit of the subject races was completely crushed.  The Servians and
Bulgarians for three or four centuries lost all consciousness of a
fatherland.  The countrymen of Simeon and Dushan became {15} mere
hewers of wood and drawers of water for their foreign masters.  Servia
and Bulgaria simply disappeared.  As late as 1834 Kinglake in
travelling to Constantinople from Belgrade must have passed straight
across Bulgaria.  Yet in "Eothen," in which he describes his travels,
he never even mentions that country or its people.

It is easy to understand that this history of Turkish horrors should
have burned itself into the heart and soul of the resurrected Servia
and Bulgaria of our own day.  But there is another circumstance
connected with the ruthless destruction and long entombment of these
nationalities which it is difficult for foreigners, even the most
intelligent foreigners, to understand or at any rate to grasp in its
full significance.  Yet the sentiments to which that circumstance has
given rise and which it still nourishes are perhaps as potent a factor
in contemporary Balkan politics as the antipathy of the Christian
nations to their former Moslem oppressors.



{16}

GREEK ECCLESIASTICAL DOMINATION OF SLAVS

I refer to the special and exceptional position held by the Greeks in
the Turkish dominions.  Though the Moslems had possessed themselves of
the Greek Empire from the Bosphorus to the Danube, Greek domination
still survived as an intellectual, ecclesiastical, and commercial
force.  The nature and effects of that supremacy, and its results upon
the fortunes of other Balkan nations, we must now proceed to consider.

The Turkish government classifies its subjects not on the basis of
nationality but on the basis of religion.  A homogeneous religious
group is designated a millet or nation.  Thus the Moslems form the
millet of Islam.  And at the present time there are among others a
Greek millet, a Catholic millet, and a Jewish millet.  But from the
first days of the Ottoman conquest until very recent times all the
Christian population, irrespective of denominational differences, was
assigned by the Sultans to the {17} Greek millet, of which the
patriarch of Constantinople was the head.  The members of this millet
were all called Greeks; the bishops and higher clergy were exclusively
Greek; and the language of their churches and schools was Greek, which
was also the language of literature, commerce, and polite society.  But
the jurisdiction of the patriarch was not restricted even to
ecclesiastical and educational matters.  It extended to a considerable
part of civil law--notably to questions of marriage, divorce, and
inheritance when they concerned Christians only.

It is obvious that the possession by the Greek patriarch of
Constantinople of this enormous power over the Christian subjects of
the Turks enabled him to carry on a propaganda of hellenization.  The
disappearance for three centuries of the national consciousness in
Servia and Bulgaria was not the sole work of the Moslem invader; a more
fatal blight to the national languages and culture were the Greek
bishops {18} and clergy who conducted their churches and schools.  And
if Kinglake knew nothing of Bulgaria as late as 1834 it was because
every educated person in that country called himself a Greek.  For it
cannot be too strongly emphasized that until comparatively recent times
all Christians of whatever nation or sect were officially recognized by
the Turks as members of the Greek millet and were therefore designated
Greeks.

The hostility of the Slavonic peoples in the Balkans, and especially of
the Bulgarians, to the Greeks, grows out of the ecclesiastical and
educational domination which the Greek clergy and bishops so long and
so relentlessly exercised over them.  Of course the Turkish Sultans are
responsible for the arrangement.  But there is no evidence that they
had any other intention than to rid themselves of a disagreeable task.
For the rest they regarded Greeks and Slavs with equal contempt.  But
the Greeks quickly recognized the racial advantage of their {19}
ecclesiastical hegemony.  And it was not in human nature to give it up
without a struggle.  The patriarchate retained its exclusive
jurisdiction over all orthodox populations till 1870, when the Sultan
issued a firman establishing the Bulgarian exarchate.

There were two other spheres in which Greek influence was paramount in
the Turkish Empire.  The Turk is a soldier and farmer; the Greek is
pre-eminent as a trader, and his ability secured him a disproportionate
share of the trade of the empire.  Again, the Greeks of Constantinople
and other large cities gradually won the confidence of the Turks and
attained political importance.  During the eighteenth century the
highest officials in the empire were invariably Phanariots, as the
Constantinople Greeks were termed from the quarter of the city in which
they resided.

In speaking of the Greeks I have not had in mind the inhabitants of the
present kingdom of Greece.  Their subjection by the Turks was as {20}
complete as that of the Serbs and Bulgarians, though of course they
were exempt from ecclesiastical domination at the hands of an alien
clergy speaking a foreign language.  The enmity of the Bulgarians may
to-day be visited upon the subjects of King Constantine, but it was not
their ancestors who imposed upon Bulgaria foreign schools and churches
but the Greeks of Constantinople and Thrace, over whom the government
of Athens has never had jurisdiction.



SERVIAN INDEPENDENCE

So much of the Balkan countries under Turkish rule.  Their emancipation
did not come till the nineteenth century.  The first to throw off the
yoke was Servia.  Taking advantage of the disorganization and anarchy
prevailing in the Ottoman Empire the Servian people rose in a body
against their oppressors in January, 1804.  Under the able leadership
first of Kara-George and afterward of Milosh Obrenovich, Servian {21}
autonomy was definitely established in 1817.  The complete independence
of the country was recognized by the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.  The
boundaries of the new state, however, fell far short of Servian
aspirations, excluding as they did large numbers of the Servian
population.  The first ruling prince of modern Servia was Milosh
Obrenovich; and the subsequent rulers have belonged either to the
Obrenovich dynasty or to its rival the dynasty of Kara-George.  King
Peter, who came to the throne in 1903, is a member of the latter family.



GREEK INDEPENDENCE

Scarcely had Servia won her freedom when the Greek war of independence
broke out.  Archbishop Germanos called the Christian population of the
Morea under the standard of the cross in 1821.  For three years the
Greeks, with the assistance of European money and volunteers (of whom
Lord Byron was the most illustrious), conducted a successful campaign
{22} against the Turkish forces; but after the Sultan had in 1824
summoned to his aid Mehemet Ali, Pasha of Egypt, with his powerful
fleet and disciplined army, the laurels which the Greek patriots had
won were recovered by the oppressor; and, with the recapture of Athens
in May, 1827, the whole country once more lay under the dominion of the
Turks.  The Powers now recognized that nothing but intervention could
save Greece for European civilization.  The Egyptian fleet was
annihilated at Navarino in October, 1828, by the fleets of England,
France, and Russia.  Greece was constituted an independent monarchy,
though the Powers who recognized its independence traced the frontier
of the emancipated country in a jealous and niggardly spirit.  Prince
Otto of Bavaria was designated the first King and reigned for thirty
years.  He was succeeded in 1863 by King George who lived to see the
northern boundary of his kingdom advanced to Saloniki, where, like a
faithful sentinel at his post, he fell, on {23} March 18, 1913, by the
hand of an assassin just as he had attained the glorious fruition of a
reign of fifty years.



BULGARIAN INDEPENDENCE

There had been a literary revival preceding the dawn of independence in
Greece.  In Bulgaria, which was the last of the Balkan states to become
independent, the national regeneration was also fostered by a literary
and educational movement, of which the founding of the first Bulgarian
school--that of Gabrovo--in 1835 was undoubtedly the most important
event.  In the next five years more than fifty Bulgarian schools were
established and five Bulgarian printing-presses set up.  The Bulgarians
were beginning to re-discover their own nationality.  Bulgarian schools
and books produced a reaction against Greek culture and the Greek
clergy who maintained it.  Not much longer would Greek remain the
language of the upper classes in Bulgarian cities; not much {24} longer
would ignorant peasants, who spoke only Bulgarian, call themselves
Greek.  The days of the spiritual domination of the Greek patriarchate
were numbered.  The ecclesiastical ascendency of the Greeks had crushed
Bulgarian nationality more completely than even the civil power of the
Turks.  The abolition of the spiritual rule of foreigners and the
restoration of the independent Bulgarian church became the leading
object of the literary reformers, educators, and patriots.  It was a
long and arduous campaign--a campaign of education and awakening at
home and of appeal and discussion in Constantinople.  Finally the
Sultan intervened and in 1870 issued a firman establishing the
Bulgarian exarchate, conferring on it immediate jurisdiction over
fifteen dioceses, and providing for the addition of other dioceses on a
vote of two-thirds of their Christian population.  The new Bulgarian
exarch was immediately excommunicated by the Greek patriarch.  But the
first and most important official step had {25} been taken in the
development of Bulgarian nationality.

The revolt against the Turks followed in 1876.  It was suppressed by
acts of cruelty and horror unparalleled even in the Balkans.  Many
thousands of men, women, and children were massacred and scores of
villages destroyed.  I remember vividly--for I was then in England--how
Gladstone's denunciation of those atrocities aroused a wave of moral
indignation and wrath which swept furiously from one end of Great
Britain to the other, and even aroused the governments and peoples of
the Continent of Europe.  The Porte refusing to adopt satisfactory
measures of reform, Russia declared war and her victorious army
advanced to the very gates of Constantinople.  The Treaty of San
Stefano, which Russia then enforced upon Turkey, created a "Big
Bulgaria" that extended from the Black Sea to the Albanian Mountains
and from the Danube to the Aegean, leaving to Turkey, however,
Adrianople, Saloniki, and the {26} Chalcidician Peninsula.  But this
treaty was torn to pieces by the Powers, who feared that "Big Bulgaria"
would become a mere Russian dependency, and they substituted for it the
Treaty of Berlin.  Under this memorable instrument, which dashed to the
ground the racial and national aspirations of the Bulgarians which the
Treaty of San Stefano had so completely satisfied, their country was
restricted to a "tributary principality" lying between the Danube and
the Balkans, Eastern Roumelia to the south being excluded from it and
made an autonomous province of Turkey.  This breach in the political
life of the race was healed in 1885 by the union of Eastern Roumelia
with Bulgaria; and the Ottoman sovereignty, which had become little
more than a form, was completely ended in 1908 when the ruler of the
enlarged principality of Bulgaria publicly proclaimed it an independent
kingdom.  In spite of a protest from the Porte the independence of
Bulgaria was at once recognized by the Powers.  {27} If Bulgaria owed
the freedom with which the Treaty of Berlin dowered her to the swords,
and also to the pens, of foreigners, her complete independence was her
own achievement.  But it was not brought about till a generation after
the Treaty of Berlin had recognized the independence of Servia,
Montenegro, and Roumania and delegated to Austria-Hungary the
administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina.  Yet the progress made by
Bulgaria first under Prince Alexander and especially since 1887 under
Prince Ferdinand (who subsequently assumed the title of King and later
of Czar) is one of the most astonishing phenomena in the history of
Modern Europe.



THE BALKAN COUNTRIES

Thus in consequence of the events we have here so hastily sketched
Turkey had lost since the nineteenth century opened a large portion of
the Balkan Peninsula.  Along the Danube and the Save at the north
Bulgaria and Servia had {28} become independent kingdoms and Bosnia and
Herzegovina had at first practically and later formally been annexed to
Austria-Hungary.  At the extreme southern end of the Balkan Peninsula
the Greeks had carved out an independent kingdom extending from Cape
Matapan to the Vale of Tempe and the Gulf of Arta.  All that remained
of European Turkey was the territory lying between Greece and the Slav
countries of Montenegro, Bosnia, Servia, and Bulgaria.  The Porte has
divided this domain into six provinces or vilayets, besides
Constantinople and its environs.  These vilayets are Scutari and Janina
on the Adriatic; Kossovo and Monastir, adjoining them on the east; next
Saloniki, embracing the centre of the area; and finally Adrianople,
extending from the Mesta River to the Black Sea.  In ordinary language
the ancient classical names are generally used to designate these
divisions.  The vilayet of Adrianople roughly corresponds to Thrace,
the Adriatic vilayets to Epirus, and the intervening {29} territory to
Macedonia.  Parts of the domain in question are, however, also known
under other names.  The district immediately south of Servia is often
called Old Servia; and the Adriatic coast lands between Montenegro and
Greece are generally designated Albania on the north and Epirus on the
south.

The area of Turkey in Europe in 1912 was 169,300 square kilometers; of
Bulgaria 96,300; of Greece 64,600; of Servia 48,300; and of Montenegro
9,000.  The population of European Turkey at the same date was
6,130,000; of Bulgaria 4,329,000; of Greece 2,632,000; of Servia
2,912,000; and of Montenegro 250,000.  To the north of the Balkan
states, with the Danube on the south and the Black Sea on the east, lay
Roumania having an area of 131,350 square kilometers and a population
of 7,070,000.



{30}

CAUSES OF THE FIRST BALKAN WAR

What was the occasion of the war between Turkey and the Balkan states
in 1912?  The most general answer that can be given to that question is
contained in the one word _Macedonia_.  Geographically Macedonia lies
between Greece, Servia, and Bulgaria.  Ethnographically it is an
extension of their races.  And if, as Matthew Arnold declared, the
primary impulse both of individuals and of nations is the tendency to
expansion, Macedonia both in virtue of its location and of its
population was fore-ordained to be a magnet to the emancipated
Christian nations of the Balkans.  Of course the expansion of Greeks
and Slavs meant the expulsion of Turks.  Hence the Macedonian question
was the quintessence of the Near Eastern Question.

But apart altogether from the expansionist ambitions and the racial
sympathies of their kindred in Bulgaria, Servia, and Greece, the {31}
population of Macedonia had the same right to emancipation from Turkish
domination and oppression as their brethren in these neighboring
states.  The Moslems had forfeited their sovereign rights in Europe by
their unutterable incapacity to govern their Christian subjects.  Had
the Treaty of Berlin sanctioned, instead of undoing, the Treaty of San
Stefano, the whole of Macedonia would have come under Bulgarian
sovereignty; and although Servia and especially Greece would have
protested against the Bulgarian absorption of their Macedonian brethren
(whom they had always hoped to bring under their own jurisdiction when
the Turk was expelled) the result would certainly have been better for
all the Christian inhabitants of Macedonia as well as for the
Mohammedans (who number 800,000 persons or nearly one third of the
entire population of Macedonia).  As it was these people were all
doomed to a continuation of Turkish misgovernment, oppression, and
slaughter.  The Treaty of Berlin {32} indeed provided for reforms, but
the Porte through diplomacy and delay frustrated all the efforts of
Europe to have them put into effect.  For fifteen years the people
waited for the fulfilment of the European promise of an amelioration of
their condition, enduring meanwhile the scandalous misgovernment of
Abdul Hamid II.  But after 1893 revolutionary societies became active.
The Internal Organization was a local body whose programme was
"Macedonia for the Macedonians."  But both in Bulgaria and in Greece
there were organized societies which sent insurgent bands into
Macedonia to maintain and assert their respective national interests.
This was one of the causes of the war between Turkey and Greece in
1897, and the reverses of the Greeks in that war inured to the
advantage of the Bulgarian propaganda in Macedonia.  Servian bands soon
after began to appear on the scene.  These hostile activities in
Macedonia naturally produced reprisals at the hands of the Turkish
authorities.  In one {33} district alone 100 villages were burned, over
8,000 houses destroyed, and 60,000 peasants left without homes at the
beginning of winter.  Meanwhile the Austrian and Russian governments
intervened and drew up elaborate schemes of reform, but their plans
could not be adequately enforced and the result was failure.  The
Austro-Russian entente came to an end in 1908, and in the same year
England joined Russia in a project aiming at a better administration of
justice and involving more effective European supervision.  Scarcely
had this programme been announced when the revolution under the Young
Turk party broke out which promised to the world a regeneration of the
Ottoman Empire.  Hopeful of these constitutional reformers of Turkey,
Europe withdrew from Macedonia and entrusted its destinies to its new
master.  Never was there a more bitter disappointment.  If autocratic
Sultans had punished the poor Macedonians with whips, the Young Turks
flayed them with scorpions.  {34} Sympathy, indignation, and horror
conspired with nationalistic aspirations and territorial interests to
arouse the kindred populations of the surrounding states.  And in
October, 1912, war was declared against Turkey by Bulgaria, Servia,
Montenegro, and Greece.



THE BALKAN LEAGUE

This brings us to the so-called Balkan Alliance about which much has
been written and many errors ignorantly propagated.  For months after
the outbreak of the war against Turkey the development of this Alliance
into a Confederation of the Balkan states, on the model of the American
or the German constitution, was a theme of constant discussion in
Europe and America.  As a matter of fact there existed no juridical
ground for this expectation, and the sentiments of the peoples of the
four Christian nations, even while they fought together against the
Moslem, were saturated with such an infusion of suspicion {35} and
hostility as to render nugatory any programme of Balkan confederation.
An alliance had indeed been concluded between Greece and Bulgaria in
May, 1912, but it was a defensive, not an offensive alliance.  It
provided that in case Turkey attacked either of these states, the other
should come to its assistance with all its forces, and that whether the
object of the attack were the territorial integrity of the nation or
the rights guaranteed it by international law or special conventions.
Without the knowledge of the Greek government, an offensive alliance
against Turkey had in March, 1912, been concluded between Servia and
Bulgaria which determined their respective military obligations in case
of war and the partition between them, in the event of victory, of the
conquered Turkish provinces in Europe.  A similar offensive and
defensive alliance between Greece and Turkey was under consideration,
but before the plan was matured Bulgaria and Servia had decided to
declare war against Turkey.  This {36} decision had been hastened by
the Turkish massacres at Kochana and Berane, which aroused the deepest
indignation, especially in Bulgaria.  Servia and Bulgaria informed
Greece that in three days they would mobilize their forces for the
purpose of imposing reforms on Turkey, and, if within a specified time
they did not receive a satisfactory reply, they would invade the
Ottoman territory and declare war.  They invited Greece on this short
notice to co-operate with them by a simultaneous mobilization.  It was
a critical moment not only for the little kingdom of King George, but
for that great cause of Hellenism which for thousands of years had
animated, and which still animated, the souls of the Greek population
in all Aegean lands.



GREECE AND THE LEAGUE

King George himself was a ruler of large experience, of great practical
wisdom, and of fine diplomatic skill.  He had shortly before {37}
selected as prime minister the former Cretan insurgent, Mr. Eleutherios
Venizelos.  It is significant that the new premier had also taken the
War portfolio.  He foresaw the impending conflict--as every wise
statesman in Europe had foreseen it--and began to make preparations for
it.  For the reorganization of the army and navy he secured French and
English experts, the former headed by General Eydoux, the latter by
Admiral Tufnel.  By 1914 it was estimated that the military and naval
forces of the country would be thoroughly trained and equipped, and war
was not expected before that date.  But now in 1912 the hand of the
Greek government was forced.  And a decision one way or the other was
inevitable.

Mr. Venizelos had already proved himself an agitator, an orator, and a
politician.  He was now to reveal himself not only to Greece but to
Europe as a wise statesman and an effective leader of his people.  The
first test came in his answer to the invitation to join Bulgaria and
{38} Servia within three days in a war against Turkey.  Of all
possibilities open to him Mr. Venizelos rejected the programme of
continued isolation for Greece.  There were those who glorified it as
splendid and majestic: to him under the existing circumstances it
seemed stupid in itself and certain to prove disastrous in its results.
Greece alone would never have been able to wage a war against Turkey.
And if Greece declined to participate in the inevitable conflict, which
the action of the two Slav states had only hastened, then whether they
won or Turkey won, Greece was bound to lose.  It was improbable that
the Ottoman power should come out of the contest victorious; but, if
the unexpected happened, what would be the position, not only of the
millions of Greeks in the Turkish Empire, but of the little kingdom of
Greece itself on whose northern boundary the insolent Moslem oppressor,
flushed with his triumph over Bulgaria, Servia, and Montenegro, would
be immovably entrenched?  On the other {39} hand, if these Christian
states themselves should succeed, as seemed likely, in destroying the
Ottoman Empire in Europe, the Kingdom of Greece, if she now remained a
passive spectator of their struggles, would find in the end that
Macedonia had come into the possession of the victorious Slavs, and the
Great Idea of the Greeks--the idea of expansion into Hellenic lands
eastward toward Constantinople--exploded as an empty bubble.  It was
Mr. Venizelos's conclusion that Greece could not avoid participating in
the struggle.  Neutrality would have entailed the complete bankruptcy
of Hellenism in the Orient.  There remained only the alternative of
co-operation--co-operation with Turkey or co-operation with the
Christian states of the Balkans.



GREEK AND BULGARIAN ANTIPATHIES

How near Greece was to an alliance with Turkey the world may never
know.  At the time nothing of the sort was even suspected.  It {40} was
not until Turkey had been overpowered by the forces of the four
Christian states and the attitude of Bulgaria toward the other three on
the question of the division of the conquered territories had become
irreconcilable and menacing that Mr. Venizelos felt it proper to
communicate to the Greek people the history of the negotiations by
which the Greek government had bound their country to a partner now
felt to be so unreasonable and greedy.  Feeling in Greece was running
high against Bulgaria.  The attacks on Mr. Venizelos's government were
numerous and bitter.  He was getting little or no credit for the
victory that had been won against Turkey, while his opponents denounced
him for sacrificing the fruits of that victory to Bulgaria.  The Greek
nation especially resented the occupation by Bulgarian troops of the
Aegean coast lands with their large Hellenic population which lay
between the Struma and the Mesta including the cities of Seres and
Drama and especially Kavala with {41} its fine harbor and its
hinterland famed for crops of choice tobacco.

It was on the fourth of July, 1913, a few days after the outbreak of
the war between Bulgaria and her late allies, that Mr. Venizelos made
his defence in an eloquent and powerful speech at a special session of
the Greek parliament.  The accusation against him was not only that
during the late war he had sacrificed Greek interests to Bulgaria but
that he had committed a fatal blunder in joining her in the campaign
against Turkey.  His reply was that since Greece could not stand alone
he had to seek allies in the Balkans, and that it was not his fault if
the choice had fallen on Bulgaria.  He had endeavored to maintain peace
with Turkey.  Listen to his own words:

"I did not seek war against the Ottoman Empire.  I would not have
sought war at a later date if I could have obtained any adjustment of
the Cretan question--that thorn in the side of Greece which can no
longer be left as {42} it is without rendering a normal political life
absolutely impossible for us.  I endeavored to adjust this question, to
continue the policy of a close understanding with the neighboring
empire, in the hope of obtaining in this way the introduction of
reforms which would render existence tolerable to the millions of
Greeks within the Ottoman Empire."



THE CRETAN PROBLEM

It was this Cretan question, even more than the Macedonian question,
which in 1897 had driven Greece, single-handed and unprepared, into a
war with Turkey in which she was destined to meet speedy and
overwhelming defeat.  It was this same "accursed Cretan question," as
Mr. Venizelos called it, which now drew the country into a military
alliance against her Ottoman neighbor who, until too late, refused to
make any concession either to the just claims of the Cretans or to the
conciliatory proposals of the Greek government.

{43}

Lying midway between three continents, the island of Crete has played a
large part both in ancient and modern history.  The explorations and
excavations of Sir Arthur Evans at Cnossus seem to prove that the
Homeric civilization of Tiryns and Mycenae was derived from Crete,
whose earliest remains carry us back three thousand years before the
Christian era.