# The Game of Life and How to Play It
Author: Florence Scovel Shinn
Category: 11_autoayuda
Source: Gutenberg #28591
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:24:43.729656
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

SOUL***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Lybarger, Brian Janes, Pilar Somoza Fernandez,
and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Transcriber's note:

   Spelling mistakes have been left in the text to match the original,
   except for obvious typographical errors, which have been corrected.





POEMS WITH POWER TO STRENGTHEN THE SOUL

Compiled and Edited by

JAMES MUDGE

Revised and Enlarged Edition







The Abingdon Press
New York        Cincinnati        Chicago

Copyright, 1907, 1909, by
Eaton & Mains

Printed in the United States of America

First Edition Printed November, 1907
Second Printing, March, 1909
Third Printing, October, 1911
Fourth Printing, July, 1915
Fifth Printing, May, 1919
Sixth Printing, January, 1922
Seventh Printing, April, 1925
Eighth Printing, March, 1928
Ninth Printing, October, 1930
Tenth Printing, September, 1934




                       TO ALL
              WHO ARE AT THE SAME TIME
  LOVERS OF GOOD POETRY AND LOVERS OF GOOD CHARACTER,
  DEVOTED TO GOD AND THEIR FELLOW-MEN, AS WELL AS TO
     LITERATURE, THE COMPILER, WHO CLAIMS A LITTLE
            PLACE IN THIS LARGE COMPANY,
      DEDICATES THE RESULT OF HIS PLEASANT LABORS




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
PREFACE                                                              vii

SUBJECTS:

HEROISM--CHIVALRY, NOBILITY, HONOR, TRUTH                              1

COURAGE--CONSTANCY, CONFIDENCE, STRENGTH, VALOR                       14

INDEPENDENCE--MANHOOD, FIRMNESS, EARNESTNESS, RESOLUTION              22

GREATNESS--FAME, SUCCESS, PROGRESS, VICTORY                           28

DUTY--LOYALTY, FAITHFULNESS, CONSCIENCE, ZEAL                         41

SERVICE--USEFULNESS, BENEVOLENCE, LABOR                               50

BROTHERHOOD--CHARITY, SYMPATHY, EXAMPLE, INFLUENCE                    66

CONSECRATION--SUBMISSION, DEVOTION, PURITY                            79

PEACE--REST, CALM, STILLNESS                                          88

HUMILITY--MEEKNESS, WEAKNESS, SELFLESSNESS                            95

CONTENTMENT--RESIGNATION, PATIENCE, COMPENSATION                     103

ASPIRATION--DESIRE, SUPPLICATION, GROWTH                             115

PRAYER--WORSHIP, COMMUNION, DEVOTION                                 123

JOY--PRAISE, CHEERFULNESS, HAPPINESS                                 138

AFFLICTION--CONSOLATION, TRIAL, ENDURANCE                            149

LOVE--DIVINE GOODNESS, UNSELFISHNESS                                 163

HOPE--PROGRESS, OPTIMISM, ENTHUSIASM                                 170

FAITH--ASSURANCE, DOUBT, UNBELIEF                                    177

TRUST--GUIDANCE, SAFETY, GLADNESS                                    187

GOD'S CARE--PROVIDENCE, GOD'S KNOWLEDGE AND BENEFICENCE              199

GOD'S WILL--OBEDIENCE, DIVINE UNION                                  209

GOD'S PRESENCE--POSSESSION, SATISFACTION, REFLECTION                 221

JESUS--HIS PRECIOUSNESS, AND BEAUTY, AND LOVE                        233

LIFE--TIME, OPPORTUNITY, EXPERIENCE, CHARACTER                       250

AGE AND DEATH--MATURITY, VICTORY, HEAVEN                             267

APPENDIX--MISCELLANEOUS SELECTIONS                                   278

INDEX TO AUTHORS                                                     288

INDEX TO TITLES                                                      292

INDEX TO FIRST LINES                                                 298




PREFACE


This is not like other collections of religious verse; still less is it
a hymnal. The present volume is directed to a very specific and wholly
practical end, the production of high personal character; and only those
poems which have an immediate bearing in this direction have been
admitted. We know of no other book published which has followed this
special line. There are fine hymnals, deservedly dear to the Church, but
they are necessarily devoted in large measure to institutional and
theological subjects, are adapted to the wants of the general
congregation and to purposes of song; while many poetical productions
that touch the heart the closest are for that very reason unsuited to
the hymnal. There are many anthologies and plentiful volumes of
religious poetry, but not one coming within our ken has been made up as
this has been. We have sought far and wide, through many libraries,
carefully conning hundreds of books and glancing through hundreds more,
to find just those lines which would have the most tonic and stimulating
effect in the direction of holier, nobler living. We have coveted verses
whose influence would be directly on daily life and would help to form
the very best habits of thought and conduct, which would have intrinsic
spiritual value and elevating power; those whose immediate tendency
would be to make people better, toughening their moral fibre and helping
them heavenward; those which they could hardly read attentively without
feeling an impulse toward the things which are pure and true and
honorable and lovely and of good report, things virtuous and
praiseworthy.

It is surprising to one who has not made the search how very many poets
there are whose voluminous and popular works yield nothing, or scarcely
anything, of this sort. We have looked carefully through many scores of
volumes of poetry without finding a line that could be of the slightest
use in this collection. They were taken up altogether with other topics.
They contained many pretty conceits, pleasant descriptions, lovely or
lively narrations--these in abundance, but words that would send the
spirit heavenward, or even earthward with any added love for humanity,
not one. On the other hand, in papers and periodicals, even in books,
are great multitudes of verses, unexceptionable in sentiment and helpful
in influence, which bear so little of the true poetic afflatus, are so
careless in construction or so faulty in diction, so imperfect in rhyme
or rhythm, so much mingled with colloquialisms or so hopelessly
commonplace in thought, as to be unworthy of a permanent place in a book
like this. They would not bear reading many times. They would offend a
properly educated taste. They would not so capture the ear as to linger
on the memory with compelling persistence, nor strike the intellect as
an exceptional presentation of important truth. The combination of fine
form and deep or inspiring thought is by no means common, but, when
found, very precious. We will not claim that this has been secured in
all the poems here presented. Not all will approve our choice in all
respects. There is nothing in which tastes more differ than in matters
of this kind. And we will admit that in some cases we have let
in--because of the important truth which they so well voiced--stanzas
not fully up to the mark in point of poetic merit. Where it has not been
possible to get the two desirable things together, as it has not always,
we have been more solicitous for the sentiment that would benefit than
for mere prettiness or perfection of form. Helpfulness has been the test
oftener than a high literary standard. The labored workmanship of the
vessel has not weighed so much with us as its perfect fitness to convey
the water of life wherewith the thirsty soul of man has been or may be
refreshed. If poets are properly judged, as has been alleged, by the
frame of mind they induce, then some who have not gained great literary
fame may still hold up their heads and claim a worthy crown.

Some poems fully within the scope of the book--like Longfellow's "Psalm
of Life"--have been omitted because of their exceeding commonness and
their accessibility. Many hymns of very high value--like "Jesus, Lover
of my soul," "My faith looks up to thee," "Nearer, my God, to thee,"
"When all thy mercies, O my God," "How firm a foundation"--have also
been omitted because they are found in all the hymnals, and to include
them would unduly swell the size of the book. A few others, although
similarly familiar, like "Jesus, I my cross have taken," and "God moves
in a mysterious way," have been inserted from a feeling that even yet
their depth and richness are not properly appreciated and that they can
never be sufficiently pondered. A few poems we have been unable to
procure permission to use; but in nearly all cases we have met with most
generous treatment from both authors and publishers owning copyrights,
and we take this occasion to express our hearty thanks for the kindness
afforded in the following instances:

     Houghton, Mifflin & Company, for the use of the poems and stanzas
     here found from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, James Russell Lowell,
     John Greenleaf Whittier, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Oliver Wendell
     Holmes, Edward Rowland Sill, Celia Thaxter, Caroline Atherton
     Mason, Edna Dean Proctor, Edmund Clarence Stedman, John Burroughs,
     John Hay, William Dean Howells, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Lucy Larcom,
     Margaret E. Sangster, Francis Bret Harte, James Freeman Clarke,
     Samuel Longfellow, Samuel Johnson, Christopher Pearse Cranch,
     Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps and John Vance
     Cheney.

     Little, Brown & Company, for poems by Helen Hunt Jackson, Louise
     Chandler Moulton, William Rounseville Alger, "Susan Coolidge"
     [Sarah Chauncey Woolsey], and John White Chadwick.

     Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Company, for poems by Sam Walter Foss.

     D. Appleton & Company, for poems by William Cullen Bryant.

     T. Y. Crowell & Company, for poems by Sarah Knowles Bolton.

     Charles Scribner's Sons, for poems by Josiah Gilbert Holland.

     The Century Company, for poems by Richard Watson Gilder.

     The Bobbs-Merrill Company, for poems by James Whitcomb Riley.

     Harper & Brothers, for poems by Edward Sandford Martin.

     Small, Maynard & Co., for poems by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

     The Rev. D. C. Knowles, for poems by Frederic Lawrence Knowles,
     especially from "Love Triumphant," published by Dana, Estes &
     Company.

     The Rev. Frederic Rowland Marvin, for poems from his "Flowers of
     Song from Many Lands."

     Professor Amos R. Wells, for poems from his "Just to Help."

     Mr. Nixon Waterman, for poems from "In Merry Mood," published by
     Forbes & Co., of Chicago.

The selections from the above American authors are used by special
arrangements with the firms mentioned, who are the only authorized
publishers of their works. Many other poems used have been found in
papers or other places which gave no indication of the original source.
In spite of much effort to trace these things it is quite likely we have
failed in some cases to give due credit or obtain the usual permission;
and we hope that if such omissions, due to ignorance or inadvertence,
are noticed they will be pardoned. Many unknown writers have left behind
them some things of value, but their names have become detached from
them or perhaps never were appended. Many volumes consulted have been
long out of print.

We are glad to record our large indebtedness to the custodians of the
Boston, Cambridge, Malden, Natick, Brookline, Jamaica Plain, Somerville,
and Newton Public Libraries, the Boston Athenaeum, the Congregational
Library, the General Theological Library, and the Library of Harvard
College, for free access to their treasures.

By far the greater part of the contents are from British and other
foreign authors, such as William Wordsworth, Alfred Tennyson, Robert
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Dinah Maria Mulock Craik, Mrs.
S. F. Adams, Anna Letitia Barbauld, Mrs. Charles, Frances Ridley
Havergal, Anna Letitia Waring, Jean Ingelow, Adelaide Anne Procter, Mme.
Guyon, Theodore Monod, Matthew Arnold, Edwin Arnold, William
Shakespeare, John Milton, George Gordon Byron, Robert Burns, William
Cowper, George Herbert, Robert Herrick, Francis Quarles, Frederick W.
Faber, John Keble, Charles Kingsley, Alexander Pope, Joseph Addison,
John Gay, Edward Young, Thomas Moore, John Newton, John Bunyan, H. Kirke
White, Horatius Bonar, James Montgomery, Charles Wesley, Richard Baxter,
Norman Macleod, George Heber, Richard Chenevix Trench, Henry Alford,
Charles Mackay, Gerald Massey, Alfred Austin, Robert Louis Stevenson,
Arthur Hugh Clough, Henry Burton, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Hartley
Coleridge, Joseph Anstice, George Macdonald, Robert Leighton, John Henry
Newman, John Sterling, Edward H. Bickersteth, Dante Gabriel Rossetti,
and many others. Of German authors there are not a few, including Johann
W. von Goethe, Johann C. F. Schiller, George A. Neumarck, Paul Gerhardt,
Benjamin Schmolke, S. C. Schoener, Scheffler, Karl Rudolf Hagenbach, S.
Rodigast, Novalis, Wolfgang C. Dessler, L. Gedicke, Martin Luther, and
Johann G. von Herder.

The number of American poets drawn upon is small compared with this
list. It is the case in all such collections. According to an analysis
of the hymns contained in the most widely used American hymnals down to
1880 the average number of hymns of purely American origin was not quite
one in seven; the proportion would be a little larger now. And the
number of Methodist poets is almost nil, in spite of the fact that the
compiler is a Methodist and the volume is issued from the official
Methodist Publishing House. But if we thought that this would be any
barrier to its wide circulation in Methodist homes we should be deeply
ashamed for our church. We are confident it will not be. For mere
denominational tenets do not at all enter into these great matters of
the soul's life. A book like this speaks loudly for the real oneness,
not only of all branches of the Christian Church, but of all religions,
in some respects. Not only do we find the various Protestant
denominations amply represented here; not only have we most inspiring
words from Roman Catholic writers like Francis Xavier, Madame Guyon,
Alexander Pope, John Henry Newman, Frederick W. Faber, and Adelaide Anne
Procter; but from Mohammedan sources, from Sufi saints of Persia, and
the Moslem devotees of Arabia, and even from Hinduism, there are
utterances of noblest truth which we cannot read without a kindling
heart. These are all brought together from the ends of the earth into a
delightful "upper chamber," where the warring discords of opinion cease
and an exceedingly precious peace prevails.

It should be said, though it is perhaps hardly necessary, that this is
by no means a book to be read at a sitting. It furnishes very
concentrated nourishment. It can be taken with largest profit only a
little at a time, according as the mood demands and circumstances
appoint. There should be very much meditation mingled with the perusal,
an attempt to penetrate the deep meaning of the lines and have them
enter into the soul for practical benefit. Some of these hymns have
great histories: they are the war cries of combatants on hard-fought
battle fields; they are living words of deep experience pressed out of
the heart by strong feeling; they are the embodiment of visions caught
on some Pisgah's glowing top. Here will be found and furnished hope for
the faint-hearted, rest for the weary, courage for the trembling, cheer
for the despondent, power for the weak, comfort for the afflicted,
guidance in times of difficulty, wise counsel for moments of perplexity,
a stimulant to faithfulness, a cure for the blues, exhilaration,
jubilation. Everything of a depressing nature has been scrupulously
ruled out. The keynote, persistently followed through all the pages, is
optimistic, bright, buoyant. Trumpet calls and bugle notes are furnished
in abundance, but no dirges or elegies. Large space, it will be seen, is
given to such topics as Heroism, True Greatness, the Care and Presence
of God, the blessings of Brotherliness, the privilege of Service, the
path of Peace, the secret of Contentment, the mission of Prayer, the joy
of Jesus, the meaning of Life, the glory of Love, the promise of Faith,
the happy aspect of old Age and Death; for these subjects come very
close home to the heart, and are illustrated in daily experience. Anyone
who feels a special need in any of these directions is confidently
recommended to turn to the proper sections and read the selections.

Very much that is here may easily and suitably be committed to memory,
that thus it may the more permanently penetrate into the inmost depth of
being. It may be used with most telling effect in sermons to give point
and pungency to the thought of the preacher. Alike in popular discourse
and public testimony or in private meditation these gems of sentiment
and thought will come into play with great advantage. The benefit which
may be derived from them can scarcely be overestimated. President Eliot,
of Harvard University, has said: "There are bits of poetry in my mind
learned in infancy that have stood by me in keeping me true to my ideas
of duty and life. Rather than lose these I would have missed all the
sermons I have ever heard." Many another can say substantially the same,
can trace his best deeds very largely to the influence of some little
stanza or couplet early stored away in his memory and coming ever
freshly to mind in after years as the embodiment of truest wisdom.

We cannot guarantee in all cases the absolute correctness of the forms
of the poems given, though much pains have been taken to ensure
accuracy; but authors themselves make changes in their productions at
different times in different editions. Nor have we always been able to
trace the poem to its source. Slips and errors of various kinds can
hardly be avoided in such matters. Even so competent an editor as John
G. Whittier, in his "Songs of Three Centuries," ascribes "Love divine,
all love excelling" to that bitter Calvinist, Augustus M. Toplady,
giving it as the sole specimen of his verse; when it was really written
by the ardent Arminian, Charles Wesley, with whom Toplady was on
anything but friendly terms. If Whittier could make a blunder of this
magnitude we may be pardoned if possibly a keen-eyed critic spies
something in our book almost as grossly incorrect. In some cases we have
been obliged to change the titles of poems so as to avoid reduplication
in our index, or to adapt them the better to the small extract taken
from the much longer form in the original. In a few cases we have made
(indicated) alterations in poems to fit them more fully to the purpose
of the book.

The volume will be found not only a readable one, we think, but also an
uncommonly useful one for presentation by those who would do good and
give gratification to their serious-minded friends with a taste for
religious poetry and a love for wandering in the "holy land of song." He
who would put before another the essential elements of religion would do
better to give him such a book as this than a treatise on theology. He
who would himself get a clear idea of what the religious life really is
will do better to pore over these pages than to dip into some
philosophical discussion. Here the best life is expressed rather than
analyzed, exhibited rather than explained. Mrs. Browning has well said,
"Plant a poet's word deep enough in any man's breast, looking presently
for offshoots, and you have done more for the man than if you dressed
him in a broadcloth coat and warmed his Sunday pottage at your fire." We
who, by preparing or circulating such volumes, aid the poets in finding
a larger circle to whom to give their message, may claim a part of the
blessing which comes to those who in any way aid humanity. George
Herbert has said,

    "A verse may find him who a sermon flies,
    And turn delight into a sacrifice."

He himself most excellently illustrated the sentiment by bequeathing to
the world many beautiful verses that are sermons of the most picturesque
sort.

One definition of poetry is "a record of the best thoughts and best
moments of the best and happiest minds." This in itself would almost be
sufficient to establish the connection between poetry and religion. It
is certain that the two have very close and vital relations. Dr.
Washington Gladden has admirably remarked, "Poetry is indebted to
religion for its largest and loftiest inspirations, and religion is
indebted to poetry for its subtlest and most luminous interpretations."
No doubt a man may be truly, deeply religious who has little or no
development on the aesthetic side, to whom poetry makes no special
appeal. But it is certain that he whose soul is deaf to the "concord of
sweet sounds" misses a mighty aid in the spiritual life. For a hymn is a
wing by which the spirit soars above earthly cares and trials into a
purer air and a clearer sunshine. Nothing can better scatter the devils
of melancholy and gloom or doubt and fear. When praise and prayer, trust
and love, faith and hope, and similar sentiments, have passed into and
through some poet's passionate soul, until he has become so charged with
them that he has been able to fix them in a form of expression where
beauty is united to strength, where concentration and ornamentation are
alike secured, then the deepest needs of great numbers are fully met.
What was vague and dim is brought into light. What was only half
conceived, and so but half felt, is made to grip the soul with power.
Poetry is of the very highest value for the inspiration and guidance of
life, for calling out the emotions and opening up spiritual visions. It
carries truths not only into the understanding, but into the heart,
where they are likely to have the most direct effect on conduct.

In the language of Robert Southey, I commit these pages to the Christian
public, with a sincere belief that much benefit will result to all who
shall read them:

    "Go forth, little book, from this my solitude;
      I cast thee on the waters,--go thy ways;
    And if, as I believe, thy vein be good,
      The world will find thee after many days.
    Be it with thee according to thy worth;
    Go, little book! in faith I send thee forth."

                                                  JAMES MUDGE.
  Malden, Mass.




HEROISM

CHIVALRY, NOBILITY, HONOR, TRUTH


THE INEVITABLE

    I like the man who faces what he must,
      With step triumphant and a heart of cheer;
      Who fights the daily battle without fear;
    Sees his hopes fail, yet keeps unfaltering trust
    That God is God; that somehow, true and just,
      His plans work out for mortals; not a tear
      Is shed when fortune, which the world holds dear,
    Falls from his grasp: better, with love, a crust
      Than living in dishonor: envies not,
    Nor loses faith in man; but does his best,
      Nor ever murmurs at his humbler lot,
    But, with a smile and words of hope, gives zest
      To every toiler: he alone is great
      Who by a life heroic conquers fate.

    --Sarah Knowles Bolton.


DEFEATED YET TRIUMPHANT

      They never fail who die
    In a great cause. The block may soak their gore;
    Their heads may sodden in the sun; their limbs
    Be strung to city gates and castle walls;
    But still their spirit walks abroad.
      Though years
    Elapse and others share as dark a doom,
    They but augment the deep and sweeping thoughts
    Which overpower all others and conduct
    The world, at last, to freedom.

    --George Gordon Byron.


A HERO GONE

    He has done the work of a true man--
      Crown him, honor him, love him;
    Weep over him, tears of woman,
      Stoop, manliest brows, above him!

    For the warmest of hearts is frozen;
      The freest of hands is still;
    And the gap in our picked and chosen
      The long years may not fill.

    No duty could overtask him,
      No need his will outrun:
    Or ever our lips could ask him,
      His hands the work had done.

    He forgot his own life for others,
      Himself to his neighbor lending.
    Found the Lord in his suffering brothers,
      And not in the clouds descending.

    And he saw, ere his eye was darkened,
      The sheaves of the harvest-bringing;
    And knew, while his ear yet hearkened,
      The voice of the reapers singing.

    Never rode to the wrong's redressing
      A worthier paladin.
    He has heard the Master's blessing,
      "Good and faithful, enter in!"

    --John Greenleaf Whittier.


THE CHARGE

    They outtalked thee, hissed thee, tore thee?
    Better men fared thus before thee;
    Fired their ringing shot and pass'd,
    Hotly charged--and sank at last.
    Charge once more, then, and be dumb!
    Let the victors, when they come,
    When the forts of folly fall,
    Find thy body by the wall!

    --Matthew Arnold.


THE REFORMER

    Before the monstrous wrong he sets him down--
    One man against a stone-walled city of sin.
    For centuries those walls have been abuilding;
    Smooth porphyry, they slope and coldly glass
    The flying storm and wheeling sun. No chink,
    No crevice, lets the thinnest arrow in.
    He fights alone, and from the cloudy ramparts
    A thousand evil faces gibe and jeer him.
    Let him lie down and die: what is the right,
    And where is justice, in a world like this?
    But by and by earth shakes herself, impatient;
    And down, in one great roar of ruin, crash
    Watch-tower and citadel and battlements.
    When the red dust has cleared, the lonely soldier
    Stands with strange thoughts beneath the friendly stars.

    --Edward Rowland Sill.


LIFE AND DEATH

    So he died for his faith. That is fine--
      More than most of us do.
    But, say, can you add to that line
      That he lived for it, too?
    In his death he bore witness at last
      As a martyr to truth.
    Did his life do the same in the past
      From the days of his youth?
    It is easy to die. Men have died
      For a wish or a whim--
    From bravado or passion or pride.
      Was it harder for him?
    But to live--every day to live out
      All the truth that he dreamt,
    While his friends met his conduct with doubt
      And the world with contempt.
    Was it thus that he plodded ahead,
      Never turning aside?
    Then we'll talk of the life that he lived.
      Never mind how he died.

    --Ernest Crosby.


THE RED PLANET MARS

    The star of the unconquered will,
      He rises in my breast,
    Serene, and resolute, and still,
      And calm, and self-possessed.

    And thou, too, whosoe'er thou art,
      That readest this brief psalm,
    As one by one thy hopes depart,
      Be resolute and calm.

    Oh, fear not in a world like this,
      And thou shalt know erelong,--
    Know how sublime a thing it is
      To suffer and be strong.

    --Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.


THE NOBLE ARMY OF MARTYRS PRAISE THEE

    Not they alone who from the bitter strife
      Came forth victorious, yielding willingly
    That which they deem most precious, even life,
      Content to suffer all things, Christ, for Thee;
    Not they alone whose feet so firmly trod
      The pathway ending in rack, sword and flame,
    Foreseeing death, yet faithful to their Lord,
      Enduring for His sake the pain and shame;
    Not they alone have won the martyr's palm,
    Not only from their life proceeds the eternal psalm.

    For earth hath martyrs now, a saintly throng;
      Each day unnoticed do we pass them by;
    'Mid busy crowds they calmly move along,
      Bearing a hidden cross, how patiently!
    Not theirs the sudden anguish, swift and keen,
      Their hearts are worn and wasted with small cares,
    With daily griefs and thrusts from foes unseen;
      Troubles and trials that take them unawares;
    Theirs is a lingering, silent martyrdom;
    They weep through weary years, and long for rest to come.

    They weep, but murmur not; it is God's will,
      And they have learned to bend their own to his;
    Simply enduring, knowing that each ill
      Is but the herald of some future bliss;
    Striving and suffering, yet so silently
      They know it least who seem to know them best.
    Faithful and true through long adversity
      They work and wait until God gives them rest;
    These surely share with those of bygone days
    The palm-branch and the crown, and swell their song of praise.


THE HAPPY WARRIOR

    'Tis, finally, the man, who, lifted high,
    Conspicuous object in a nation's eye,
    Or left unthought of in obscurity,
    Who, with a toward or untoward lot,
    Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not,--
    Plays, in the many games of life, that one
    Where what he most doth value must be won;
    Whom neither shape of danger can dismay,
    Nor thought of tender happiness betray;
    Who, not content that former work stand fast,
    Looks forward, persevering to the last,
    From well to better, daily self-surpast;
    Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth
    Forever, and to noble deeds give birth,
    Or he must fall, to sleep without his fame,
    And leave a dead, unprofitable name--
    Finds comfort in himself and in his cause,
    And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws
    His breath in confidence of Heaven's applause:
    This is the happy warrior; this is he
    That every man in arms should wish to be.

    --William Wordsworth.


    Aground the man who seeks a noble end
    Not angels but divinities attend.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.


ROBERT BROWNING'S MESSAGE

    Grow old along with me!
    The best is yet to be,
    The last of life, for which the first was made;
    Our times are in His hand
    Who saith, "A whole I planned,
    Youth shows but half; trust God: see all, nor be afraid!"

    Poor vaunt of life indeed,
    Were man but formed to feed
    On joy, to solely seek and find and feast;
    Such feasting ended, then
    As sure an end to men:
    Irks care the crop-full bird? Frets doubt the maw-crammed beast?

    Then welcome each rebuff
    That turns earth's smoothness rough,
    Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go!
    Be our joys three parts pain!
    Strive, and hold cheap the strain;
    Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the throe!

    For thence--a paradox
    Which comforts while it mocks--
    Shall life succeed in that it seems to fail:
    What I aspired to be,
    And was not, comforts me:
    A brute I might have been, but would not sink i' the scale.

    * * * * *

    Not on the vulgar mass
    Called "work" must sentence pass,
      Things done, that took the eye and had the price;
    O'er which, from level stand,
    The low world laid its hand,
      Found straightway to its mind, could value in a trice:

    But all, the world's coarse thumb
    And finger failed to plumb,
      So passed in making up the main account;
    All instincts immature,
    All purposes unsure,
      That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man's amount:

    Thoughts hardly to be packed
    Into a narrow act,
      Fancies that broke through language and escaped;
    All I could never be,
    All, men ignored in me,
      This I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher shaped.

    * * * * *

    Fool! All that is, at all,
    Lasts ever, past recall;
      Earth changes, but thy soul and God stand sure:
    What entered into thee
    _That_ was, is, and shall be:
      Time's wheel runs back or stops; Potter and clay endure.

    --From "Rabbi Ben Ezra."


TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD

    Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide,
    In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side;
    Some great cause, God's new Messiah, offering each the bloom or blight,
    Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right,
    And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that light.

    Careless seems the great Avenger; history's pages but record
    One death-grapple in the darkness 'twixt old systems and the Word;
    Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne--
    Yet that scaffold sways the future, and, behind the dim unknown,
    Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch, above his own.

    Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust,
    Ere her cause bring fame and profit, and 'tis prosperous to be just;
    Then it is the brave man chooses, while the coward stands aside,
    Doubting in his abject spirit, till his Lord is crucified,
    And the multitude make virtue of the faith they had denied.

    Count me o'er earth's chosen heroes--they were souls that stood alone
    While the men they agonized for hurled the contumelious stone;
    Stood serene, and down the future saw the golden beam incline
    To the side of perfect justice, mastered by their faith divine,
    By one man's plain truth to manhood and to God's supreme design.

    By the light of burning heretics Christ's bleeding feet I track,
    Toiling up new Calvaries ever with the cross that turns not back,
    And these mounts of anguish number how each generation learned
    One new word of that grand _Credo_ which in prophet-hearts hath burned
    Since the first man stood God-conquered with his face to heaven
      upturned.

    For Humanity sweeps onward: where to-day the martyr stands,
    On the morrow crouches Judas with the silver in his hands;
    Far in front the cross stands ready and the crackling fagots burn,
    While the hooting mob of yesterday in silent awe return
    To glean up the scattered ashes into History's golden urn.

    'Tis as easy to be heroes as to sit the idle slaves
    Of a legendary virtue carved upon our fathers' graves;
    Worshipers of light ancestral make the present light a crime;--
    Was the Mayflower launched by cowards, steered by men behind their
      time?
    Turn those tracks toward Past or Future that make Plymouth Rock
      sublime?

    They have rights who dare maintain them; we are traitors to our sires,
    Smothering in their holy ashes Freedom's new-lit altar-fires;
    Shall we make their creed our jailer? shall we in our haste to slay,
    From the tombs of the old prophets steal the funeral lamps away
    To light up the martyr-fagots round the prophets of to-day?

    New occasions teach new duties; Time makes ancient good uncouth;
    They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth;
    Lo, before us gleam her camp-fires! we ourselves must Pilgrims be,
    Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate winter
      sea,
    Nor attempt the Future's portal with the Past's blood-rusted key.

    --James Russell Lowell.


COLUMBUS

    Behind him lay the gray Azores,
      Behind the Gates of Hercules;
    Before him not the ghost of shores,
      Before him only shoreless seas.
    The good mate said: "Now, we must pray,
      For lo! the very stars are _gone_,
    Speak, Admiral, what shall I say?"
      "Why say, 'Sail on! sail on! and on!'"

    "My men grow mutinous day by day;
      My men grow ghastly wan and weak."
    The stout mate thought of home; a spray
      Of salt wave washed his swarthy cheek.
    "What shall I say, brave Admiral, say,
      If we sight naught but seas at dawn?"
    "Why, you shall say at break of day,
      'Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!'"

    They sailed and sailed, as winds might blow,
      Until at last the blanched mate said:
    "Why, now not even God would know
      Should I and all my men fall dead.
    These very winds forget their way,
      For God from these dread seas is gone.
    Now speak, brave Admiral, speak and say--"
      He said, "Sail on! sail on! and on!"

    They sailed. They sailed. Then spoke the mate:
      "This mad sea shows its teeth to-night.
    He curls his lip, he lies in wait,
      With lifted teeth, as if to bite!
    Brave Admiral, say but one good word.
      What shall we do when hope is gone?"
    The words leapt as a leaping sword,
      "Sail on! sail on! sail on! and on!"

    Then, pale and worn, he kept his deck,
      And peered through darkness. Ah, that night
    Of all dark nights! And then a speck--
      A light! A light! A light!
    It grew, a starlit flag unfurled!
      It grew to be Time's burst of dawn:
    He gained a world; he gave that world
      Its grandest lesson: "On, and on!"

    --Joaquin Miller.


THE CHOSEN FEW

    The Son of God goes forth to war,
      A kingly crown to gain;
    His blood-red banner streams afar;
      Who follows in his train.

    Who best can drink His cup of woe,
      And triumph over pain,
    Who patient bears His cross below--
      He follows in His train.

    A glorious band, the chosen few,
      On whom the Spirit came;
    Twelve valiant saints, their hope they knew,
      And mocked the cross and flame.

    They climbed the dizzy steep to heaven
      Through peril, toil and pain;
    O God! to us may grace be given
      To follow in their train!

    --Reginald Heber.


HOW DID YOU DIE?

    Did you tackle that trouble that came your way
      With a resolute heart and cheerful,
    Or hide your face from the light of day
      With a craven soul and fearful?
    O, a trouble is a ton, or a trouble is an ounce,
      Or a trouble is what you make it,
    And it isn't the fact that you're hurt that counts,
      But only--how did you take it?

    You are beaten to earth? Well, well, what's that?
      Come up with a smiling face.
    It's nothing against you to fall down flat,
      But to lie there--that's disgrace.
    The harder you're thrown, why, the higher you bounce;
      Be proud of your blackened eye!
    It isn't the fact that you're licked that counts;
      It's how did you fight--and why?

    And though you be done to the death, what then?
      If you battled the best you could.
    If you played your part in the world of men,
      Why, the Critic will call it good.
    Death comes with a crawl or comes with a pounce,
      And whether he's slow or spry,
    It isn't the fact that you're dead that counts,
      But only--how did you die?

    --Edmund Vance Cooke.


LUTHER

    That which he knew he uttered,
      Conviction made him strong;
    And with undaunted courage
      He faced and fought the wrong.
    No power on earth could silence him
      Whom love and faith made brave;
    And though four hundred years have gone
      Men strew with flowers his grave.

    A frail child born to poverty,
      A German miner's son;
    A poor monk searching in his cell,
      What honors he has won!
    The nations crown him faithful,
      A man whom truth made free;
    God give us for these easier times
      More men as real as he!

    --Marianne Farningham.


THE MARTYRS

    Flung to the heedless winds,
      Or on the waters cast,
    The martyrs' ashes, watched,
      Shall gathered be at last;
    And from that scattered dust,
      Around us and abroad,
    Shall spring a plenteous seed
      Of witnesses for God.

    The Father hath received
      Their latest living breath;
    And vain is Satan's boast
      Of victory in their death;
    Still, still, though dead, they speak,
      And, trumpet-tongued, proclaim
    To many a wakening land,
      The one availing name.

    --Martin Luther, tr. by John A. Messenger.


    Stainless soldier on the walls,
      Knowing this--and knows no more--
    Whoever fights, whoever falls,
      Justice conquers evermore,
      Justice after as before;
    And he who battles on her side,
      God, though he were ten times slain,
    Crowns him victor glorified,
      Victor over death and pain.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.


ETERNAL JUSTICE

    The man is thought a knave, or fool,
      Or bigot, plotting crime,
    Who, for the advancement of his kind,
      Is wiser than his time.
    For him the hemlock shall distil;
      For him the axe be bared;
    For him the gibbet shall be built;
      For him the stake prepared.
    Him shall the scorn and wrath of men
      Pursue with deadly aim;
    And malice, envy, spite, and lies,
      Shall desecrate his name.
    But Truth shall conquer at the last,
      For round and round we run;
    And ever the Right comes uppermost,
      And ever is Justice done.

    Pace through thy cell, old Socrates,
      Cheerily to and fro;
    Trust to the impulse of thy soul,
      And let the poison flow.
    They may shatter to earth the lamp of clay
      That holds a light divine,
    But they cannot quench the fire of thought
      By any such deadly wine.
    They cannot blot thy spoken words
      From the memory of man
    By all the poison ever was brewed
      Since time its course began.
    To-day abhorred, to-morrow adored,
      For round and round we run,
    And ever the Truth comes uppermost,
      And ever is Justice done.

    Plod in thy cave, gray anchorite;
      Be wiser than thy peers;
    Augment the range of human power,
      And trust to coming years.
    They may call thee wizard, and monk accursed,
      And load thee with dispraise;
    Thou wert born five hundred years too soon
      For the comfort of thy days;
    But not too soon for human kind.
      Time hath reward in store;
    And the demons of our sires become
      The saints that we adore.
    The blind can see, the slave is lord,
      So round and round we run;
    And ever the Wrong is proved to be wrong
      And ever is Justice done.

    Keep, Galileo, to thy thought,
      And nerve thy soul to bear;
    They may gloat o'er the senseless words they wring
      From the pangs of thy despair;
    They may veil their eyes, but they cannot hide
      The sun's meridian glow;
    The heel of a priest may tread thee down
      And a tyrant work thee woe;
    But never a truth has been destroyed;
      They may curse it and call it crime;
    Pervert and betray, or slander and slay
      Its teachers for a time.
    But the sunshine aye shall light the sky,
      As round and round we run;
    And the Truth shall ever come uppermost,
      And Justice shall be done.

    And live there now such men as these--
      With thoughts like the great of old?
    Many have died in their misery,
      And left their thought untold;
    And many live, and are ranked as mad,
      And are placed in the cold world's ban,
    For sending their bright, far-seeing souls
      Three centuries in the van.
    They toil in penury and grief,
      Unknown, if not maligned;
    Forlorn, forlorn, bearing the scorn
      Of the meanest of mankind!
    But yet the world goes round and round,
      And the genial seasons run;
    And ever the Truth comes uppermost,
      And ever is Justice done.

    --Charles Mackay.


    We cannot kindle when we will
      The fire which in the heart resides.
    The spirit bloweth and is still;
      In mystery our soul abides:
    But tasks in hours of insight willed
    Can be through hours of gloom fulfilled.

    With aching hands and bleeding feet
      We dig and heap, lay stone on stone;
    We bear the burden and the heat
      Of the long day, and wish 'twere done.
    Not till the hours of light return,
    All we have built do we discern.

    --Matthew Arnold.


WHAT MAKES A HERO?

    What makes a hero?--not success, not fame,
    Inebriate merchants, and the loud acclaim
      Of glutted avarice--caps tossed up in air,
      Or pen of journalist with flourish fair;
    Bells pealed, stars, ribbons, and a titular name--
      These, though his rightful tribute, he can spare;
    His rightful tribute, not his end or aim,
      Or true reward; for never yet did these
      Refresh the soul, or set the heart at ease.
    What makes a hero?--An heroic mind,
    Expressed in action, in endurance proved.
      And if there be preeminence of right,
      Derived through pain well suffered, to the height
    Of rank heroic, 'tis to bear unmoved
    Not toil, not risk, not rage of sea or wind,
    Not the brute fury of barbarians blind,
      But worse--ingratitude and poisonous darts,
      Launched by the country he had served and loved.
    This, with a free, unclouded spirit pure,
    This, in the strength of silence to endure,
      A dignity to noble deeds imparts
      Beyond the gauds and trappings of renown;
      This is the hero's complement and crown;
    This missed, one struggle had been wanting still--
    One glorious triumph of the heroic will,
      One self-approval in his heart of hearts.

    --Henry Taylor.


    As the bird trims her to the gale
      I trim myself to the storm of time;
    I man the rudder, reef the sail,
      Obey the voice at eve obeyed at prime;
    "Lowly faithful banish fear,
      Right onward drive unharmed;
    The port, well worth the cruise, is near,
      And every wave is charmed."

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.


DEMAND FOR MEN

    The world wants men--large-hearted, manly men;
    Men who shall join its chorus and prolong
    The psalm of labor, and the psalm of love.
    The times want scholars--scholars who shall shape
    The doubtful destinies of dubious years,
    And land the ark that bears our country's good
    Safe on some peaceful Ararat at last.
    The age wants heroes--heroes who shall dare
    To struggle in the solid ranks of truth;
    To clutch the monster error by the throat;
    To bear opinion to a loftier seat;
    To blot the era of oppression out,
    And lead a universal freedom on.
    And heaven wants souls--fresh and capacious souls;
    To taste its raptures, and expand, like flowers,
    Beneath the glory of its central sun.
    It wants fresh souls--not lean and shrivelled ones;
    It wants fresh souls, my brother, give it thine.
    If thou indeed wilt be what scholars should;
    If thou wilt be a hero, and wilt strive
    To help thy fellow and exalt thyself,
    Thy feet at last shall stand on jasper floors;
    Thy heart, at last, shall seem a thousand hearts--
    Each single heart with myriad raptures filled--
    While thou shalt sit with princes and with kings,
    Rich in the jewel of a ransomed soul.


    Blessed are they who die for God,
      And earn the martyr's crown of light;
    Yet he who lives for God may be
      A greater conqueror in his sight.


    Better to stem with heart and hand
      The roaring tide of life than lie,
    Unmindful, on its flowery strand,
      Of God's occasions drifting by!


TRUTH

    Truth will prevail, though men abhor
      The glory of its light;
    And wage exterminating war
      And put all foes to flight.

    Though trodden under foot of men,
      Truth from the dust will spring,
    And from the press--the lip--the pen--
      In tones of thunder ring.

    Beware--beware, ye who resist
      The light that beams around,
    Lest, ere you look through error's mist,
      Truth strike you to the ground.

    --D. C. Colesworthy.


TO A REFORMER

    Nay, now, if these things that you yearn to teach
      Bear wisdom, in your judgment, rich and strong,
    Give voice to them though no man heed your speech,
      Since right is right though all the world _go_ wrong.

    The proof that you believe what you declare
      Is that you still stand firm though throngs pass by;
    Rather cry truth a lifetime to void air
      Than flatter listening millions with one lie!

    --Edgar Fawcett.


TEACH ME THE TRUTH

    Teach me the truth, Lord, though it put to flight
      My cherished dreams and fondest fancy's play;
    Give me to know the darkness from the light,
        The night from day.

    Teach me the truth, Lord, though my heart may break
      In casting out the falsehood for the true;
    Help me to take my shattered life and make
        Its actions new.

    Teach me the truth, Lord, though my feet may fear
      The rocky path that opens out to me;
    Rough it may be, but let the way be clear
        That leads to thee.

    Teach me the truth, Lord. When false creeds decay,
      When man-made dogmas vanish with the night,
    Then, Lord, on thee my darkened soul shall stay,
        Thou living Light.

    --Frances Lockwood Green.


HEROISM

    It takes great strength to train
    To modern service your ancestral brain;
    To lift the weight of the unnumbered years
    Of dead men's habits, methods, and ideas;
    To hold that back with one hand, and support
    With the other the weak steps of the new thought.

    It takes great strength to bring your life up square
    With your accepted thought and hold it there;
    Resisting the inertia that drags back
    From new attempts to the old habit's track.
    It is so easy to drift back, to sink;
    So hard to live abreast of what you think.

    It takes great strength to live where you belong
    When other people think that you are wrong;
    People you love, and