# Isis Unveiled vol II
Author: H.P. Blavatsky
Category: 08_espiritualidad
Source: Gutenberg #3040
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:22:53.716999
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by The James J. Kelly Library of St. Gregory's
University, and Alev Akman






THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE,

A CHRONICLE OF THE POLITICIANS AND PARTY ORGANIZATION

By Samuel P. Orth




CONTENTS

     I.    THE RISE OF THE PARTY
     II.   THE RISE OF THE MACHINE
     III.  THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM
     IV.   THE POLITICIAN AND THE CITY
     V.    TAMMANY HALL
     VI.   LESSER OLIGARCHIES
     VII.  LEGISLATIVE OMNIPOTENCE
     VIII. THE NATIONAL HIERARCHY
     IX.   THE AWAKENING
     X.    PARTY REFORM
     XI.   THE EXPERT AT LAST

     BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE




THE BOSS AND THE MACHINE



CHAPTER I. THE RISE OF THE PARTY

The party system is an essential instrument of Democracy. Wherever
government rests upon the popular will, there the party is the organ of
expression and the agency of the ultimate power. The party is, moreover,
a forerunner of Democracy, for parties have everywhere preceded free
government. Long before Democracy as now understood was anywhere
established, long before the American colonies became the United
States, England was divided between Tory and Whig. And it was only after
centuries of bitter political strife, during which a change of ministry
would not infrequently be accompanied by bloodshed or voluntary exile,
that England finally emerged with a government deriving its powers from
the consent of the governed.

The functions of the party, both as a forerunner and as a necessary
organ of Democracy, are well exemplified in American experience. Before
the Revolution, Tory and Whig were party names used in the colonies to
designate in a rough way two ideals of political doctrine. The Tories
believed in the supremacy of the Executive, or the King; the Whigs in
the supremacy of Parliament. The Tories, by their rigorous and ruthless
acts giving effect to the will of an un-English King, soon drove the
Whigs in the colonies to revolt, and by the time of the Stamp Act (1765)
a well-knit party of colonial patriots was organized through committees
of correspondence and under the stimulus of local clubs called "Sons of
Liberty." Within a few years, these patriots became the Revolutionists,
and the Tories became the Loyalists. As always happens in a successful
revolution, the party of opposition vanished, and when the peace of
1783 finally put the stamp of reality upon the Declaration of 1776, the
patriot party had won its cause and had served its day.

Immediately thereafter a new issue, and a very significant one, began to
divide the thought of the people. The Articles of Confederation, adopted
as a form of government by the States during a lull in the nationalistic
fervor, had utterly failed to perform the functions of a national
government. Financially the Confederation was a beggar at the doors of
the States; commercially it was impotent; politically it was bankrupt.
The new issue was the formation of a national government that should in
reality represent a federal nation, not a collection of touchy States.
Washington in his farewell letter to the American people at the close of
the war (1783) urged four considerations: a strong central government,
the payment of the national debt, a well-organized militia, and the
surrender by each State of certain local privileges for the good of the
whole. His "legacy," as this letter came to be called, thus bequeathed
to us Nationalism, fortified on the one hand by Honor and on the other
by Preparedness.

The Confederation floundered in the slough of inadequacy for several
years, however, before the people were sufficiently impressed with the
necessity of a federal government. When, finally, through the adroit
maneuver of Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, the Constitutional
Convention was called in 1787, the people were in a somewhat chastened
mood, and delegates were sent to the Convention from all the States
except Rhode Island.

No sooner had the delegates convened and chosen George Washington as
presiding officer, than the two opposing sides of opinion were revealed,
the nationalist and the particularist, represented by the Federalists
and the Anti-Federalists, as they later termed themselves. The
Convention, however, was formed of the conservative leaders of the
States, and its completed work contained in a large measure, in spite
of the great compromises, the ideas of the Federalists. This achievement
was made possible by the absence from the Convention of the two types of
men who were to prove the greatest enemy of the new document when it was
presented for popular approval, namely, the office-holder or politician,
who feared that the establishment of a central government would deprive
him of his influence, and the popular demagogue, who viewed with
suspicion all evidence of organized authority. It was these two
types, joined by a third--the conscientious objector--who formed the
AntiFederalist party to oppose the adoption of the new Constitution.
Had this opposition been well-organized, it could unquestionably have
defeated the Constitution, even against its brilliant protagonists,
Hamilton, Madison, Jay, and a score of other masterly men.

The unanimous choice of Washington for President gave the new Government
a non-partizan initiation. In every way Washington attempted to foster
the spirit of an undivided household. He warned his countrymen against
partizanship and sinister political societies. But he called around
his council board talents which represented incompatible ideals
of government. Thomas Jefferson, the first Secretary of State, and
Alexander Hamilton, the first Secretary of the Treasury, might for a
time unite their energies under the wise chieftainship of Washington,
but their political principles could never be merged. And when,
finally, Jefferson resigned, he became forthwith the leader of the
opposition--not to Washington, but to Federalism as interpreted by
Hamilton, John Adams, and Jay.

The name Anti-Federalist lost its aptness after the inauguration of
the Government. Jefferson and his school were not opposed to a federal
government. They were opposed only to its pretensions, to its assumption
of centralized power. Their deep faith in popular control is revealed in
the name they assumed, Democratic-Republican. They were eager to limit
the federal power to the glorification of the States; the Federalists
were ambitious to expand the federal power at the expense of localism.
This is what Jefferson meant when he wrote to Washington as early as
1792, "The Republican party wish to preserve the Government in its
present form." Now this is a very definite and fundamental distinction.
It involves the political difference between government by the people
and government by the representatives of the people, and the practical
difference between a government by law and a government by mass-meeting.

Jefferson was a master organizer. At letter-writing, the one means of
communication in those days, he was a Hercules. His pen never
wearied. He soon had a compact party. It included not only most of the
Anti-Federalists, but the small politicians, the tradesmen and artisans,
who had worked themselves into a ridiculous frenzy over the French
Revolution and who despised Washington for his noble neutrality. But
more than these, Jefferson won over a number of distinguished men who
had worked for the adoption of the Constitution, the ablest of whom was
James Madison, often called "the Father of the Constitution."

The Jeffersonians, thus representing largely the debtor and farmer
class, led by men of conspicuous abilities, proceeded to batter down the
prestige of the Federalists. They declared themselves opposed to large
expenditures of public funds, to eager exploitation of government
ventures, to the Bank, and to the Navy, which they termed "the great
beast with the great belly." The Federalists included the commercial
and creditor class and that fine element in American life composed
of leading families with whom domination was an instinct, all led,
fortunately, by a few idealists of rare intellectual attainments. And,
with the political stupidity often characteristic of their class, they
stumbled from blunder to blunder. In 1800 Thomas Jefferson, who adroitly
coined the mistakes of his opponents into political currency for
himself, was elected President. He had received no more electoral votes
than Aaron Burr, that mysterious character in our early politics, but
the election was decided by the House of Representatives, where, after
seven days' balloting, several Federalists, choosing what to them was
the lesser of two evils, cast the deciding votes for Jefferson. When the
Jeffersonians came to power, they no longer opposed federal pretensions;
they now, by one of those strange veerings often found in American
politics, began to give a liberal interpretation to the Constitution,
while the Federalists with equal inconsistency became strict
constructionists. Even Jefferson was ready to sacrifice his theory of
strict construction in order to acquire the province of Louisiana.

The Jeffersonians now made several concessions to the manufacturers,
and with their support linked to that of the agriculturists Jeffersonian
democracy flourished without any potent opposition. The second war with
England lent it a doubtful luster but the years immediately following
the war restored public confidence. Trade flourished on the sea. The
frontier was rapidly pushed to the Mississippi and beyond into the vast
empire which Jefferson had purchased. When everyone is busy, no one
cares for political issues, especially those based upon philosophical
differences. So Madison and Monroe succeeded to the political regency
which is known as the Virginia Dynasty.

This complacent epoch culminated in Monroe's "Era of Good Feeling,"
which proved to be only the hush before the tornado. The election of
1824 was indecisive, and the House of Representatives was for a second
time called upon to decide the national choice. The candidates were John
Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, and William H. Crawford. Clay
threw his votes to Adams, who was elected, thereby arousing the wrath of
Jackson and of the stalwart and irreconcilable frontiersmen who hailed
him as their leader. The Adams term merely marked a transition from the
old order to the new, from Jeffersonian to Jacksonian democracy. Then
was the word Republican dropped from the party name, and Democrat became
an appellation of definite and practical significance.

By this time many of the older States had removed the early restrictions
upon voting, and the new States carved out of the West had written
manhood suffrage into their constitutions. This new democracy flocked to
its imperator; and Jackson entered his capital in triumph, followed by a
motley crowd of frontiersmen in coonskin caps, farmers in butternut-dyed
homespun, and hungry henchmen eager for the spoils. For Jackson had let
it be known that he considered his election a mandate by the people to
fill the offices with his political adherents.

So the Democrats began their new lease of life with an orgy of spoils.
"Anybody is good enough for any job" was the favorite watchword.
But underneath this turmoil of desire for office, significant party
differences were shaping themselves. Henry Clay, the alluring orator
and master of compromise, brought together a coalition of opposing
fragments. He and his following objected to Jackson's assumption of vast
executive prerogatives, and in a brilliant speech in the Senate Clay
espoused the name Whig. Having explained the origin of the term in
English and colonial politics, he cried: "And what is the present but
the same contest in another form? The partizans of the present Executive
sustain his favor in the most boundless extent. The Whigs are opposing
executive encroachment and a most alarming extension of executive power
and prerogative. They are contending for the rights of the people, for
free institutions, for the supremacy of the Constitution and the laws."

There soon appeared three practical issues which forced the new
alignment. The first was the Bank. The charter of the United States Bank
was about to expire, and its friends sought a renewal. Jackson
believed the Bank an enemy of the Republic, as its officers were
anti-Jacksonians, and he promptly vetoed the bill extending the charter.
The second issue was the tariff. Protection was not new; but Clay
adroitly renamed it, calling it "the American system." It was popular in
the manufacturing towns and in portions of the agricultural communities,
but was bitterly opposed by the slave-owning States.

A third issue dealt with internal improvements. All parts of the country
were feeling the need of better means of communication, especially
between the West and the East. Canals and turnpikes were projected in
every direction. Clay, whose imagination was fervid, advocated a vast
system of canals and roads financed by national aid. But the doctrine of
states-rights answered that the Federal Government had no power to enter
a State, even to spend money on improvements, without the consent of
that State. And, at all events, for Clay to espouse was for Jackson to
oppose.

These were the more important immediate issues of the conflict between
Clay's Whigs and Jackson's Democrats, though it must be acknowledged
that the personalities of the leaders were quite as much an issue as any
of the policies which they espoused. The Whigs, however, proved unequal
to the task of unhorsing their foes; and, with two exceptions,
the Democrats elected every President from Jackson to Lincoln. The
exceptions were William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor, both of whom
were elected on their war records and both of whom died soon after their
inauguration. Tyler, who as Vice-President succeeded General Harrison,
soon estranged the Whigs, so that the Democratic triumph was in effect
continuous over a period of thirty years.

Meanwhile, however, another issue was shaping the destiny of parties and
of the nation. It was an issue that politicians dodged and candidates
evaded, that all parties avoided, that publicists feared, and that
presidents and congressmen tried to hide under the tenuous fabric of
their compromises. But it was an issue that persisted in keeping alive
and that would not down, for it was an issue between right and wrong.
Three times the great Clay maneuvered to outflank his opponents over the
smoldering fires of the slavery issue, but he died before the repeal
of the Missouri Compromise gave the death-blow to his loosely gathered
coalition. Webster, too, and Calhoun, the other members of that
brilliant trinity which represented the genius of Constitutional
Unionism, of States Rights, and of Conciliation, passed away before the
issue was squarely faced by a new party organized for the purpose of
opposing the further expansion of slavery.

This new organization, the Republican party, rapidly assumed form
and solidarity. It was composed of Northern Whigs, of anti-slavery
Democrats, and of members of several minor groups, such as the
Know-Nothing or American party, the Liberty party, and included as well
some of the despised Abolitionists. The vote for Fremont, its first
presidential candidate, in 1856, showed it to be a sectional party,
confined to the North. But the definite recognition of slavery as an
issue by an opposition party had a profound effect upon the Democrats.
Their Southern wing now promptly assumed an uncompromising attitude,
which, in 1860, split the party into factions. The Southern wing named
Breckinridge; the Northern wing named Stephen A. Douglas; while many
Democrats as well as Whigs took refuge in a third party, calling itself
the Constitutional Union, which named John Bell. This division cost the
Democrats the election, for, under the unique and inspiring leadership
of Abraham Lincoln, the Republicans rallied the anti-slavery forces of
the North and won.

Slavery not only racked the parties and caused new alignments; it
racked and split the Union. It is one of the remarkable phenomena of
our political history that the Civil War did not destroy the Democratic
party, though the Southern chieftains of that party utterly lost their
cause. The reason is that the party never was as purely a Southern
as the Republican was a Northern party. Moreover, the arrogance and
blunders of the Republican leaders during the days of Reconstruction
helped to keep it alive. A baneful political heritage has been handed
down to us from the Civil War--the solid South. It overturns the
national balance of parties, perpetuates a pernicious sectionalism,
and deprives the South of that bipartizan rivalry which keeps open the
currents of political life.

Since the Civil War the struggle between the two dominant parties has
been largely a struggle between the Ins and the Outs. The issues that
have divided them have been more apparent than real. The tariff, the
civil service, the trusts, and the long list of other "issues" do not
denote fundamental differences, but only variations of degree. Never
in any election during this long interval has there been definitely at
stake a great national principle, save for the currency issue of 1896
and the colonial question following the War with Spain. The revolt of
the Progressives in 1912 had a character of its own; but neither of the
old parties squarely joined issue with the Progressives in the
contest which followed. The presidential campaign of 1916 afforded an
opportunity to place on trial before the people a great cause, for there
undoubtedly existed then in the country two great and opposing sides
of public opinion--one for and the other against war with Germany. Here
again, however, the issue was not joined but was adroitly evaded by both
the candidates.

None the less there has been a difference between the two great parties.
The Republican party has been avowedly nationalistic, imperialistic, and
in favor of a vigorous constructive foreign policy. The Democratic party
has generally accepted the lukewarm international policy of Jefferson
and the exaltation of the locality and the plain individual as
championed by Jackson. Thus, though in a somewhat intangible and
variable form, the doctrinal distinctions between Hamilton and Jefferson
have survived.

In the emergence of new issues, new parties are born. But it is one of
the singular characteristics of the American party system that third
parties are abortive. Their adherents serve mainly as evangelists,
crying their social and economic gospel in the political wilderness. If
the issues are vital, they are gradually absorbed by the older parties.

Before the Civil War several sporadic parties were formed. The most
unique was the Anti-Masonic party. It flourished on the hysteria caused
by the abduction of William Morgan of Batavia, in western New York, in
1826. Morgan had written a book purporting to lay bare the secrets
of Freemasonry. His mysterious disappearance was laid at the doors of
leading Freemasons; and it was alleged that members of this order placed
their secret obligations above their duties as citizens and were hence
unfit for public office. The movement became impressive in Pennsylvania,
Vermont, Massachusetts, Ohio, and New York. It served to introduce
Seward and Fillmore into politics. Even a national party was organized,
and William Wirt, of Maryland, a distinguished lawyer, was nominated for
President. He received, however, only the electoral votes of Vermont.
The excitement soon cooled, and the party disappeared.

The American or Know-Nothing party had for its slogan "America for
Americans," and was a considerable factor in certain localities,
especially in New York and the Middle States, from 1853 to 1856. The
Free Soil party, espousing the cause of slavery restriction, named
Martin Van Buren as its presidential candidate and polled enough votes
in the election of 1848 to defeat Cass, the Democratic candidate. It
did not survive the election of 1852, but its essential principle was
adopted by the Republican party.

Since the Civil War, the currency question has twice given life to
third-party movements. The Greenbacks of 1876-1884 and the Populists
of the 90's were both of the West. Both carried on for a few years a
vigorous crusade, and both were absorbed by the older parties as
the currency question assumed concrete form and became a commanding
political issue. Since 1872, the Prohibitionists have named national
tickets. Their question, which was always dodged by the dominant
parties, is now rapidly nearing a solution.

The one apparently unreconcilable element in our political life is the
socialistic or labor party. Never of great importance in any national
election, the various labor parties have been of considerable influence
in local politics. Because of its magnitude, the labor vote has always
been courted by Democrats and Republicans with equal ardor but with
varying success.



CHAPTER II. THE RISE OF THE MACHINE

Ideas or principles alone, however eloquently and insistently
proclaimed, will not make a party. There must be organization. Thus
we have two distinct practical phases of American party politics: one
regards the party as an agency of the electorate, a necessary organ of
democracy; the other, the party as an organization, an army determined
to achieve certain conquests. Every party has, therefore, two aspects,
each attracting a different kind of person: one kind allured by the
principles espoused; the other, by the opportunities of place and
personal gain in the organization. The one kind typifies the body of
voters; the other the dominant minority of the party.

When one speaks, then, of a party in America, he embraces in that term:
first, the tenets or platform for which the party assumes to stand
(i.e., principles that may have been wrought out of experience, may have
been created by public opinion, or were perhaps merely made out of hand
by manipulators); secondly, the voters who profess attachment to these
principles; and thirdly, the political expert, the politician with his
organization or machine. Between the expert and the great following are
many gradations of party activity, from the occasional volunteer to the
chieftain who devotes all his time to "politics."

It was discovered very early in American experience that without
organization issues would disintegrate and principles remain but
scintillating axioms. Thus necessity enlisted executive talent and
produced the politician, who, having once achieved an organization,
remained at his post to keep it intact between elections and used it for
purposes not always prompted by the public welfare.

In colonial days, when the struggle began between Crown and Colonist,
the colonial patriots formed clubs to designate their candidates for
public office. In Massachusetts these clubs were known as "caucuses," a
word whose derivation is unknown, but which has now become fixed in our
political vocabulary. These early caucuses in Boston have been described
as follows: "Mr. Samuel Adams' father and twenty others, one or two from
the north end of the town, where all the ship business is carried on,
used to meet, make a caucus, and lay their plans for introducing certain
persons into places of trust and power. When they had settled it, they
separated, and used each their particular influence within his own
circle. He and his friends would furnish themselves with ballots,
including the names of the parties fixed upon, which they distributed
on the day of election. By acting in concert together with a careful and
extensive distribution of ballots they generally carried the elections
to their own mind."

As the revolutionary propaganda increased in momentum, caucuses assumed
a more open character. They were a sort of informal town meeting, where
neighbors met and agreed on candidates and the means of electing them.
After the adoption of the Constitution, the same methods were continued,
though modified to suit the needs of the new party alignments. In this
informal manner, local and even congressional candidates were named.

Washington was the unanimous choice of the nation. In the third
presidential election, John Adams was the tacitly accepted candidate
of the Federalists and Jefferson of the Democratic-Republicans, and no
formal nominations seem to have been made. But from 1800 to 1824 the
presidential candidates were designated by members of Congress in
caucus. It was by this means that the Virginia Dynasty fastened itself
upon the country. The congressional caucus, which was one of the most
arrogant and compact political machines that our politics has produced,
discredited itself by nominating William H. Crawford (1824), a machine
politician, whom the public never believed to be of presidential
caliber. In the bitter fight that placed John Quincy Adams in the White
House and made Jackson the eternal enemy of Clay, the congressional
caucus met its doom. For several years, presidential candidates were
nominated by various informal methods. In 1828 a number of state
legislatures formally nominated Jackson. In several States the party
members of the legislatures in caucus nominated presidential candidates.
DeWitt Clinton was so designated by the New York legislature in 1812
and Henry Clay by the Kentucky legislature in 1822. Great mass meetings,
often garnished with barbecues, were held in many parts of the
country in 1824 for indorsing the informal nominations of the various
candidates.

But none of these methods served the purpose. The President was a
national officer, backed by a national party, and chosen by a national
electorate. A national system of nominating the presidential candidates
was demanded. On September 26, 1831, 113 delegates of the Anti-Masonic
party, representing thirteen States, met in a national convention in
Baltimore. This was the first national nominating convention held in
America.

In February, 1831, the Whig members of the Maryland legislature issued
a call for a national Whig convention. This was held in Baltimore the
following December. Eighteen States were represented by delegates, each
according to the number of presidential electoral votes it cast. Clay
was named for President. The first national Democratic convention met in
Baltimore on May 21, 1832, and nominated Jackson.

Since that time, presidential candidates have been named in national
conventions. There have been surprisingly few changes in procedure since
the first convention. It opened with a temporary organization, examined
the credentials of delegates, and appointed a committee on permanent
organization, which reported a roster of permanent officers. It
appointed a committee on platform--then called an address to the people;
it listened to eulogistic nominating speeches, balloted for candidates,
and selected a committee to notify the nominees of their designation.
This is practically the order of procedure today. The national
convention is at once the supreme court and the supreme legislature of
the national party. It makes its own rules, designates its committees,
formulates their procedure and defines their power, writes the platform,
and appoints the national executive committee.

Two rules that have played a significant part in these conventions
deserve special mention. The first Democratic convention, in order to
insure the nomination of Van Buren for Vice-President--the nomination of
Jackson for President was uncontested--adopted the rule that "two-thirds
of the whole number of the votes in the convention shall be necessary
to constitute a choice." This "two-thirds" rule, so undemocratic in its
nature, remains the practice of the Democratic party today. The
Whigs and Republicans always adhered to the majority rule. The early
Democratic conventions also adopted the practice of allowing the
majority of the delegates from any State to cast the vote of the entire
delegation from that State, a rule which is still adhered to by the
Democrats. But the Republicans have since 1876 adhered to the policy of
allowing each individual delegate to cast his vote as he chooses.

The convention was by no means novel when accepted as a national organ
for a national party. As early as 1789 an informal convention was held
in the Philadelphia State House for nominating Federalist candidates for
the legislature. The practice spread to many Pennsylvania counties and
to other States, and soon this informality of self-appointed delegates
gave way to delegates appointed according to accepted rules. When the
legislative caucus as a means for nominating state officers fell into
disrepute, state nominating conventions took its place. In 1812 one of
the earliest movements for a state convention was started by Tammany
Hall, because it feared that the legislative caucus would nominate
DeWitt Clinton, its bitterest foe. The caucus, however, did not
name Clinton, and the convention was not assembled. The first state
nominating convention was held in Utica, New York, in 1824 by that
faction of the Democratic party calling itself the People's party.
The custom soon spread to every State, so that by 1835 it was firmly
established. County and city conventions also took the place of the
caucus for naming local candidates.

But nominations are only the beginning of the contest, and obviously
caucuses and conventions cannot conduct campaigns. So from the beginning
these nominating bodies appointed campaign committees. With the increase
in population came the increased complexity of the committee system. By
1830 many of the States had perfected a series of state, district, and
county committees.

There remained the necessity of knitting these committees into a
national unity. The national convention which nominated Clay in 1831
appointed a "Central State Corresponding Committee" in each State where
none existed, and it recommended "to the several States to organize
subordinate corresponding committees in each county and town." This
was the beginning of what soon was to evolve into a complete national
hierarchy of committees. In 1848 the Democratic convention appointed a
permanent national committee, composed of one member from each State.
This committee was given the power to call the next national convention,
and from the start became the national executive body of the party.

It is a common notion that the politician and his machine are of
comparatively recent origin. But the American politician arose
contemporaneously with the party, and with such singular fecundity of
ways and means that it is doubtful if his modern successors could teach
him anything. McMaster declares: "A very little study of long-forgotten
politics will suffice to show that in filibustering and gerrymandering,
in stealing governorships and legislatures, in using force at the polls,
in colonizing and in distributing patronage to whom patronage is due, in
all the frauds and tricks that go to make up the worst form of practical
politics, the men who founded our state and national governments were
always our equals, and often our masters." And this at a time when
only propertied persons could vote in any of the States and when only
professed Christians could either vote or hold office in two of them!

While Washington was President, Tammany Hall, the first municipal
machine, began its career; and presently George Clinton, Governor of
New York, and his nephew, DeWitt Clinton, were busy organizing the first
state machine. The Clintons achieved their purpose through the agency
of a Council of Appointment, prescribed by the first Constitution of
the State, consisting of the Governor and four senators chosen by the
legislature. This council had the appointment of nearly all the civil
officers of the State from Secretary of State to justices of the peace
and auctioneers, making a total of 8287 military and 6663 civil offices.
As the emoluments of some of these offices were relatively high, the
disposal of such patronage was a plum-tree for the politician. The
Clintons had been Anti-Federalists and had opposed the adoption of the
Constitution. In 1801 DeWitt Clinton became a member of the Council of
Appointment and soon dictated its action. The head of every Federalist
office-holder fell. Sheriffs, county clerks, surrogates, recorders,
justices by the dozen, auctioneers by the score, were proscribed for the
benefit of the Clintons. De Witt was sent to the United States Senate in
1802, and at the age of thirty-three he found himself on the highroad
to political eminence. But he resigned almost at once to become Mayor of
New York City, a position he occupied for about ten years, years filled
with the most venomous fights between Burrites and Bucktails. Clinton
organized a compact machine in the city. A biased contemporary
description of this machine has come down to us. "You [Clinton] are
encircled by a mercenary band, who, while they offer adulation to your
system of error, are ready at the first favorable moment to forsake and
desert you. A portion of them are needy young men, who without
maturely investigating the consequence, have sacrificed principle to
self-aggrandizement. Others are mere parasites, that well know the
tenure on which they hold their offices, and will ever pay implicit
obedience to those who administer to their wants. Many of your followers
are among the most profligate of the community. They are the bane of
social and domestic happiness, senile and dependent panderers."

In 1812 Clinton became a candidate for President and polled 89 electoral
votes against Madison's 128. Subsequently he became Governor of New
York on the Erie Canal issue; but his political cunning seems to have
forsaken him; and his perennial quarrels with every other faction in his
State made him the object of a constant fire of vituperation. He had,
however, taught all his enemies the value of spoils, and he adhered to
the end to the political action he early advised a friend to adopt:
"In a political warfare, the defensive side will eventually lose. The
meekness of Quakerism will do in religion but not in politics. I repeat
it, everything will answer to energy and decision."

Martin Van Buren was an early disciple of Clinton. Though he broke with
his political chief in 1813, he had remained long enough in the Clinton
school to learn every trick; and he possessed such native talent for
intrigue, so smooth a manner, and such a wonderful memory for names,
that he soon found himself at the head of a much more perfect and
far-reaching machine than Clinton had ever dreamed of. The Empire
State has never produced the equal of Van Buren as a manipulator of
legislatures. No modern politician would wish to face publicity if
he resorted to the petty tricks that Van Buren used in legislative
politics. And when, in 1821, he was elected to the Senate of the United
States, he became one of the organizers of the first national machine.

The state machine of Van Buren was long known as the "Albany Regency."
It included several very able politicians: William L. Marcy, who became
United States Senator in 1831; Silas Wright, elected Senator in 1833;
John A. Dix, who became Senator in 1845; Benjamin F. Butler, who was
United States Attorney-General under President Van Buren, besides a
score or more of prominent state officials. It had an influential organ
in the Albany Argus, lieutenants in every county, and captains in every
town. Its confidential agents kept the leaders constantly informed of
the political situation in every locality; and its discipline made
the wish of Van Buren and his colleagues a command. Federal and local
patronage and a sagacious distribution of state contracts sustained this
combination. When the practice of nominating by conventions began, the
Regency at once discerned the strategic value of controlling delegates,
and, until the break in the Democratic party in 1848, it literally
reigned in the State.

With the disintegration of the Federalist party came the loss of
concentrated power by the colonial families of New England and New York.
The old aristocracy of the South was more fortunate in the maintenance
of its power. Jefferson's party was not only well disciplined; it gave
its confidence to a people still accustomed to class rule and in turn
was supported by them. In a strict sense the Virginia Dynasty was not
a machine like Van Buren's Albany Regency. It was the effect of the
concentrated influence of men of great ability rather than a definite
organization. The congressional caucus was the instrument through which
their influence was made practical. In 1816, however, a considerable
movement was started to end the Virginia monopoly. It spread to the
Jeffersonians of the North. William H. Crawford, of Georgia, and Daniel
Tompkins, of New York, came forward as competitors with Monroe for the
caucus nomination. The knowledge of this intrigue fostered the rising
revolt against the caucus. Twenty-two Republicans, many of whom were
known to be opposed to the caucus system, absented themselves. Monroe
was nominated by the narrow margin of eleven votes over Crawford. By the
time Monroe had served his second term the discrediting of the caucus
was made complete by the nomination of Crawford by a thinly attended
gathering of his adherents, who presumed to act for the party. The
Virginia Dynasty had no further favorites to foster, and a new political
force swept into power behind the dominating personality of Andrew
Jackson.

The new Democracy, however, did not remove the aristocratic power of
the slaveholder; and from Jackson's day to Buchanan's this became an
increasing force in the party councils. The slavery question illustrates
how a compact group of capable and determined men, dominated by an
economic motive, can exercise for years in the political arena a
preponderating influence, even though they represent an actual minority
of the nation. This untoward condition was made possible by the
political sagacity and persistence of the party managers and by the
unwillingness of a large portion of the people to bring the real issue
to a head.

Before the Civil War, then, party organization had become a fixed and
necessary incident in American politics. The war changed the face of our
national affairs. The changes wrought multiplied the opportunities of
the professional politician, and in these opportunities, as well as
in the transfused energies and ideals of the people, we must seek the
causes for those perversions of party and party machinery which have
characterized our modern epoch.



CHAPTER III. THE TIDE OF MATERIALISM

The Civil War, which shocked the country into a new national
consciousness and rearranged the elements of its economic life, also
brought about a new era in political activity and management. The United
States after Appomattox was a very different country from the United
States before Sumter was fired upon. The war was a continental upheaval,
like the Appalachian uplift in our geological history, producing sharp
and profound readjustments.

Despite the fact that in 1864 Lincoln had been elected on a Union ticket
supported by War Democrats, the Republicans claimed the triumphs of
the war as their own. They emerged from the struggle with the enormous
prestige of a party triumphant and with "Saviors of the Union" inscribed
on their banners.

The death of their wise and great leader opened the door to a violent
partizan orgy. President Andrew Johnson could not check the fury of the
radical reconstructionists; and a new political era began in a riot of
dogmatic and insolent dictatorship, which was intensified by the mob of
carpetbaggers, scalawags, and freedmen in the South, and not abated by
the lawless promptings of the Ku-Klux to regain patrician leadership in
the home of secession nor by the baneful resentment of the North. The
soldier was made a political asset. For a generation the "bloody shirt"
was waved before the eyes of the Northern voter; and the evils, both
grotesque and gruesome, of an unnatural reconstruction are not yet
forgotten in the South.

A second opportunity of the politician was found in the rapid economic
expansion that followed the war. The feeling of security in the North
caused by the success of the Union arms buoyed an unbounded optimism
which made it easy to enlist capital in new enterprises, and the
protective tariff and liberal banking law stimulated industry. Exports
of raw material and food products stimulated mining, grazing, and
farming. European capital sought investments in American railroads,
mines, and industrial under-takings. In the decade following the war the
output of pig iron doubled, that of coal multiplied by five, and that
of steel by one hundred. Superior iron and copper, Pennsylvania coal and
oil, Nevada and California gold and silver, all yielded their enormous
values to this new call of enterprise. Inventions and manufactures of
all kinds flourished. During 1850-60 manufacturing establishments
had increased by fourteen per cent. During 1860-70 they increased
seventy-nine per cent.

The Homestead Act of May 20, 1862, opened vast areas of public lands
to a new immigration. The flow of population was westward, and the West
called for communication with the East. The Union Pacific and Central
Pacific railways, the pioneer transcontinental lines, fostered on
generous grants of land, were the tokens of the new transportation
movement. Railroads were pushing forward everywhere with unheard-of
rapidity. Short lines were being merged into far-reaching systems.
In the early seventies the Pennsylvania system was organized and the
Vanderbilts acquired control of lines as far west as Chicago. Soon
the Baltimore and Ohio system extended its empire of trade to the
Mississippi. Half a dozen ambitious trans-Mississippi systems,
connecting with four new transcontinental projects, were put into
operation.

Prosperity is always the opportunity of the politician. What is of
greatest significance to the student of politics is that prosperity at
this time was organized on a new basis. Before the war business had been
conducted largely by individuals or partnerships. The unit was small;
the amount of capital needed was limited. But now the unit was expanding
so rapidly, the need for capital was so lavish, the empire of trade so
extensive, that a new mechanism of ownership was necessary. This device,
of course, was the corporation. It had, indeed, existed as a trading
unit for many years. But the corporation before 1860 was comparatively
small and was generally based upon charters granted by special act of
the legislature.

No other event has had so practical a bearing on our politics and our
economic and social life as the advent of the corporate device for
owning and manipulating private business. For it links the omnipotence
of the State to the limitations of private ownership; it thrusts
the interests of private business into every legislature that grants
charters or passes regulating acts; it diminishes, on the other hand,
that stimulus to honesty and correct dealing which a private individual
discerns to be his greatest asset in trade, for it replaces individual
responsibility with group responsibility and scatters ownership among so
large a number of persons that sinister manipulation is possible.

But if the private corporation, through its interest in broad charter
privileges and liberal corporation laws and its devotion to the tariff
and to conservative financial policies, found it convenient to do
business with the politician and his organization, the quasi-public
corporations, especially the steam railroads and street railways, found
it almost essential to their existence. They received not only their
franchises but frequently large bonuses from the public treasury. The
Pacific roads alone were endowed with an empire of 145,000,000 acres of
public land. States, counties, and cities freely loaned their credit
and gave ample charters to new railway lines which were to stimulate
prosperity.

City councils, legislatures, mayors, governors, Congress, and presidents
were drawn into the maelstrom of commercialism. It is not surprising
that side by side with the new business organization there grew up a
new political organization, and that the new business magnate was
accompanied by a new political magnate. The party machine and the party
boss were the natural product of the time, which was a time of gain and
greed. It was a sordid reaction, indeed, from the high principles that
sought victory on the field of battle and that found their noblest
embodiment in the character of Abraham Lincoln.

The dominant and domineering party chose the leading soldier of the
North as its candidate for President. General Grant, elected as a
popular idol because of his military genius, possessed neither the
experience nor the skill to countermove the machinations of designing
politicians and their business allies. On the other hand, he soon
displayed an admiration for business success that placed him at once in
accord with the spirit of the hour. He exalted men who could make money
rather than men who could command ideas. He chose Alexander T. Stewart,
the New York merchant prince, one of the three richest men of his day,
for Secretary of the Treasury. The law, however, forbade the appointment
to this office of any one who should "directly or indirectly be
concerned or interested in carrying on the business of trade
or commerce," and Stewart was disqualified. Adolph E. Borie of
Philadelphia, whose qualifications were the possession of great wealth
and the friendship of the President, was named Secretary of the Navy.
Another personal friend, John A. Rawlins, was named Secretary of War.
A third friend, Elihu B. Washburne of Illinois, was made Secretary
of State. Washburne soon resigned, and Hamilton Fish of New York was
appointed in his place. Fish, together with General Jacob D. Cox
of Ohio, Secretary of the Interior, and Judge E. Rockwood Hoar of
Massachusetts, Attorney-General, formed a strong triumvirate of ability
and character in the Cabinet. But, while Grant displayed pleasure in the
companionship of these eminent men, they never possessed his complete
confidence. When the machinations for place and favor began, Hoar and
Cox were in the way. Hoar had offended the Senate in his recommendations
for federal circuit judges (the circuit court was then newly
established), and when the President named him for Justice of the
Supreme Court, Hoar was rejected. Senator Cameron, one of the chief
spoils politicians of the time, told Hoar frankly why: "What could you
expect for a man who had snubbed seventy Senators!" A few months later
(June, 1870), the President bluntly asked for Hoar's resignation, a
sacrifice to the gods of the Senate, to purchase their favor for the
Santo Domingo treaty.

Cox resigned in the autumn. As Secretary of the Interior he had charge
of the Patent Office, Census Bureau, and Indian Service, all of them
requiring many appointments. He had attempted to introduce a sort of
civil service examination for applicants and had vehemently protested
against political assessments levied on clerks in his department. He
especially offended Senators Cameron and Chandler, party chieftains who
had the ear of the President. General Cox stated the matter plainly:
"My views of the necessity of reform in the civil service had brought
me more or less into collision with the plans of our active political
managers and my sense of duty has obliged me to oppose some of their
methods of action." These instances reveal how the party chieftains
insisted inexorably upon their demands. To them the public service was
principally a means to satisfy party ends, and the chief duty of the
President and his Cabinet was to satisfy the claims of party necessity.
General Cox said that distributing offices occupied "the larger part of
the time of the President and all his Cabinet." General Garfield wrote
(1877): "One-third of the working hours of Senators and Representatives
is hardly sufficient to meet the demands made upon them in reference to
appointments to office."

By the side of the partizan motives stalked the desire for gain. There
were those to whom parties meant but the opportunity for sudden wealth.
The President's admiration for commercial success and his inability to
read the motives of sycophants multiplied their opportunities, and in
the eight years of his administration there was consummated the baneful
union of business and politics.

During the second Grant campaign (1872), when Horace Greeley was making
his astounding run for President, the New York Sun hinted at gross and
wholesale briberies of Congressmen by Oakes Ames and his associates who
had built the Union Pacific Railroad, an enterprise which the United
States had generously aided with loans and gifts.

Three committees of Congress, two in the House and one in the Senate
(the Poland Committee, the Wilson Committee, and the Senate Committee),
subsequently investigated the charges. Their investigations disclosed
the fact that Ames, then a member of the House of Representatives,
the principal stoc