# The Masnavi (Book of Rumi)
Author: Jalal ud-Din Muhammad Rumi
Category: 08_espiritualidad
Source: Gutenberg #47178
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:23:07.877013
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

FAIRY TALES FROM MANY LANDS

[Illustration]




FAIRY TALES FROM MANY LANDS

    BY
    KATHARINE PYLE

    AUTHOR OF "WHERE THE WIND BLOWS," "THE COUNTERPANE FAIRY,"
    "CARELESS JANE AND OTHER TALES," ETC.

    WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY THE AUTHOR

[Illustration]

    NEW YORK
    E. P. DUTTON & CO., INC.




    Copyright, 1911
    BY E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY

    _First printing        October, 1911_
    _Second printing       July, 1917_
    _Third printing        August, 1920_
    _Fourth printing       October, 1925_
    _Fifth printing        March, 1926_
    _Sixth printing        Feb., 1932_
    _Seventh printing      Nov., 1938_




CONTENTS


                                                  PAGE
    THE SEVEN GOLDEN PEAHENS                        11
    MISHOSHA, THE MAGICIAN OF THE LAKE              47
    HAAMDAANEE AND THE WISE GAZELLE                 79
    THE TWO SISTERS                                 98
    THE FEATHER OF THE ZHAR BIRD                   118
    THE BEAUTIFUL MARIA DI LEGNO                   140
    THE EVIL ONE WHO MARRIED THREE SISTERS         176
    THE FAITHFUL DOG                               196
    KEMPION                                        209
    BUTTERCUP                                      219
    THE SUN AND THE MOON                           238
    HOW THE ELEPHANT AND THE WHALE WERE TRICKED    247
    CHERRY                                         261
    DIAMONDS AND ROSES AND PEARLS                  280
    THE THREE COWS                                 295




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                 PAGE
    The gulls carried him swiftly back to Mishosha's
          Island                                        _Frontispiece_
    There were many beautiful dresses among the
          treasures of the palace                                 102
    She lifted it in her hands and tasted it                      128
    Each one was said to be handsomer than the others             176
    Overcome with joy at the sight of such a treasure             198
    "Then show me how, and I will hold the ax for you"            234
    "Ha!" cried the Sun, "is it you, fair one?"                   244
    He was richly dressed and looked like a foreigner             264
    She lifted the heavy pitcher for her to drink                 282




FAIRY TALES FROM MANY LANDS




[Illustration]

THE SEVEN GOLDEN PEAHENS

(_From the Servian Folk Lore_)


THERE was once a king who had three sons, and he had also a golden
apple tree, that bore nothing but golden apples, and this tree he loved
as though it had been his daughter. The king was never able, however,
to have any of the fruit it bore, for no sooner were the apples ripe
than they would disappear in the night, and this in spite of a guard
being set around the garden to watch it and see that no one entered in.

One time the eldest prince came to the king and asked to be allowed to
keep watch over the tree that night. "And if I do," said he, "I promise
you that nothing shall be allowed to approach it, not even the smallest
sparrow."

The king consented to this, so that evening the prince took his sword,
and went out into the garden to mount guard over the tree. Scarcely had
it become dark when he heard a sound of wings beating through the air,
and this sound made him so drowsy that his eyelids weighed like lead,
and he fell into a deep sleep. When he awoke it was morning, and all
the apples were gone from the tree.

The prince returned to the palace, and was obliged to confess to the
king that he had slept all the night through.

The king was very angry, but the second son said, "My father, allow me
to keep watch over the tree the next time, and I promise you I will do
better than my brother, for I will not so much as close my eyes until
daybreak."

The king was willing, so when evening came the second son took his
sword and went into the garden to watch the tree as his brother had
done before him.

Hardly was it dark before he heard the sound of wings, and then in
spite of himself his eyes closed and he fell into a deep sleep. He
never stirred until daylight, and when he sat up and looked about him
every apple was gone.

After this it was the turn of the third son to watch the tree, but he
was a very wise prince. He had listened to all his brothers had to say
about the sound of wings they had heard, and how the sound had put them
to sleep, and before he went into the garden he stuffed his ears with
cotton so that he could hear nothing. Then he placed himself near the
tree and began his watch.

As soon as it was dark the sound of beating wings began, and the sound
drew nearer and nearer, but the prince did not hear it because of the
cotton in his ears. Then a light appeared in the sky, and seven golden
peahens flew into the garden. They shone so that all the place was lit
up as though by the light of day. Six of the peahens settled on the
branches of the apple tree and began to shake down the apples, but the
seventh changed into the most beautiful princess the prince had ever
seen in all his life. Her hair was like a golden cloud about her; her
eyes were as blue as the sky, and from head to foot she was dressed
all in cloth of gold. She began to gather up the fruit that the others
shook down to her, and for awhile the prince could neither stir nor
speak for wonder of her beauty. Then he took the cotton from his ears,
and went over to her, and began to talk to her and ask her who she was.

At first when the princess saw him she was frightened, but presently
she told him that she and the six peahens were the daughters of a king
who lived far away, and that they had flown over seven mountains and
over seven seas, all for the love of the golden apples. She also told
him that by day she and her sisters lived in a beautiful pleasure
palace their father had built for them, but when night came they
changed themselves into peahens, and flew about the world wherever they
chose.

After a while the day began to break, and then the princess changed
herself into a peahen again, and she and her sisters flew away, but she
left with the prince three of the golden apples she had gathered.

The prince returned to the palace and gave the apples to his father,
and the king was delighted at the sight of them. "And did you find out
who it is that steals them?" he asked.

Instead of answering him, the prince managed to put him off, and the
next night he said he would watch in the garden again. Then the same
thing happened. He stopped his ears with cotton, the seven peahens
arrived and six alighted in the tree, but the seventh became a
beautiful princess, and came across the garden to him. Then the prince
unstopped his ears and they talked together until daybreak, when she
flew away with her sisters, and this time, as before, she left three of
the apples with him.

As soon as it was morning the prince carried the apples to his father,
and now, whether or no, the king would have him say who it was who came
into the garden every night to steal the fruit.

The prince was obliged to tell his story, but when he said it was seven
golden peahens that stole the apples, and that they were the daughters
of a great king his father would scarcely believe him. The brothers,
too, laughed him to scorn, for they were very jealous of him. "This is
a strange story," they cried, "and it certainly cannot be true. Either
you are trying to deceive us, or you fell asleep and dreamed it all."

"It is all certainly true," answered the youngest brother, "and there
are the three golden apples to prove it."

"They are no proof," answered the others. "If you would have us believe
you, keep watch in the garden again to-night, and when the princess
comes cut a lock of her golden hair and keep it to show to us. When we
see that then we will believe you."

At first the prince would not consent to do this, but they were so
urgent that he finally agreed, and when he went into the garden he took
a pair of sharp scissors with him. After a time the golden peahens
flew into the garden, and after the youngest sister had changed into
a princess, she and the prince talked together all night. When she was
about to go the prince managed, without being seen, to take hold of a
lock of her hair and cut it off.

No sooner had he done this, however, than the princess gave a sorrowful
cry. "Alas, alas!" said she, "If you had only been patient for a little
while longer all would have gone well. Now I must go away forever, and
you will never see me again unless you journey over the seven seas and
over the seven mountains to seek me." Then she changed into a peahen,
and flew away with the others.

The prince was filled with despair at the thought that he had lost her,
for he loved her so well that he did not know how he could live without
her.

In the morning his father and his brothers came to seek him in the
garden, and when they saw the lock of golden hair they were obliged to
believe him, and they could not wonder enough.

But the young prince saddled his horse and set out in search of his
princess. On he went and on he went, and everywhere he rode he asked
those he met whether they had seen seven golden peahens, but no one
could tell him anything about them.

At last after he had journeyed over seven mountains, and over seven
seas, he came to a palace that stood beside a lake, and in this palace
lived an enchantress queen and her daughter. He knocked at the door and
when the queen came to see who was there he once more asked whether
she could tell him anything of the seven golden peahens who were the
daughters of a king.

"Oh, yes, that I can," answered the queen, "and if you are in search of
them you have not much further to go. Every morning they come to bathe
in this lake, and anyone who watches them can see them."

When the prince heard this he was filled with joy and would have set
out for the lake at once, but the queen, seeing how young and handsome
he was, begged him to come in and rest for awhile. "Why do you follow
after these seven princesses?" she asked. "My daughter is a princess,
too, and a beautiful girl. If you can take a fancy to her you shall
marry her and live here and after I die this palace and all that is in
it shall be yours."

The prince, however, would not listen to this, for he loved the golden
peahen princess with all his heart, and her alone would he marry.

When the queen found that he was not to be persuaded she pretended to
fall in with his wishes. "Very well," said she, "it shall be as you
desire, but let me send someone with you to show you the way to the
lake."

The prince thanked her, and she called a servant to go with him, but
before they set out she took the servant aside and gave him privately
a small pair of bellows. "When you reach the lake," said she, "take an
opportunity to get behind the prince and blow upon the back of his neck
with these bellows. If you do this I will reward you well."

The servant promised to obey her and then he and the prince set out
together.

When they reached the shore the prince sat down on some rocks to watch
for the peahens, but the servant got back of him and blew upon his neck
with the bellows and immediately the prince fell asleep.

Presently there was a light in the sky and the seven golden peahens
came flying and alighted upon the borders of the lake. Six of them
began to bathe themselves in its waters but the seventh one changed
into a princess. She came over to the prince and began to call to him
and caress him, but she could not awaken him from his sleep.

After a time the peahens came up from the water, and the princess said
to the servant, "Tell your master when he awakens twice more will I
come but never again." Then she and the others all flew away together.

When the prince awoke and found that the princess had been there
and had tried in vain to awaken him, he was ready to die with grief
and disappointment. However, she would return the next day, and he
determined he would be there watching for her and that this time he
would not by any means allow himself to fall asleep.

So the next morning he hurried down to the lake again, and the servant
went with him, but before they left the castle the queen gave the
servant the pair of bellows, and bade him blow upon the back of the
prince's neck when he was not aware of it.

They reached the lake, and the prince would not sit down for he feared
he might fall asleep again, but the servant managed to get back of him
and blow upon his neck with the bellows. Then, in spite of himself the
prince sank down in a deep sleep.

Presently the peahens came flying, and as before the youngest sister
came over to the prince and began to call and caress him, but he still
slept on in spite of her. Then she turned to the servant and said to
him, "Tell your master when he awakens that once more will I come and
never again, but unless he cuts the head of the nail from the body he
will never see me."

When the prince awoke and heard the message the princess had left he
understood that the servant had deceived him, and that the princess
meant unless he destroyed the servant he would never find her. So the
next day when they started out together the prince took a sharp sword
with him. He waited until they were out of sight of the castle, and
then he turned and cut the servant's head from his shoulders and went
on down, alone, to the lake.

He had not been there long when he saw a light, and heard the seven
peahens coming. No sooner had they alighted than the seventh one
changed into the beautiful princess. When she saw that the prince was
awake and watching for her, she was overcome with joy. "Now we shall
never be parted again," she said, "but you shall go to our palace with
me and be my own dear husband."

Then she changed him into a golden peacock, and the six peahens came
up from the water and they all flew away together. On and on they
went until they came to the pleasure palace the king had built for
his daughters, and there the golden peacock was changed back into a
prince, and the peahens became seven princesses. The prince was married
to the youngest one, amidst great rejoicings and they all lived there
happily together.

Everything went joyfully for seven months, and then the princess came
to the prince and said, "My dear husband, the time has now come when
my sisters and I must go to pay a visit to the king our father. You
cannot go with us, but if you will obey what I am about to tell you all
will go well. We will be away for three days, and during that time the
palace and all that is in it will be yours. You may go where you please
except into the third cellar that is over beyond the others. There you
must not go, for if you do some terrible misfortune will certainly come
upon both of us."

The prince promised that all should be as she wished, and then she and
her sisters flew away together leaving him alone.

For the first day the prince did not go near the cellar and scarcely
thought of it. The second day he looked to see where it was, and when
he came to the door it was so heavily chained and bolted that he could
not but wonder what was back of it, and the third day he could think of
nothing but the cellar and what was in it. At last he felt that come
what might he must see what treasure it was that was kept locked away
behind that door. He went down to it again and began to unfasten the
bolts and bars; the last one fell and he opened the door and stepped
inside and looked about him. There was nothing there to see but a great
chest with holes bored in the lid, and bound about with nine bands of
iron.

The prince stared and wondered, and while he still stood there he heard
a groaning sound from within the chest, and a voice cried, "Brother,
for the love of mercy give me some water to wet my poor mouth."

The prince was always pitiful toward those in trouble, and as soon as
he heard this, without stopping to inquire what was inside of the chest
he ran and fetched a cup of water and poured it through one of the
holes.

Scarcely had he done this before there was a straining sound, and three
of the iron bands burst asunder.

"Brother, that was scarcely enough to wet my mouth," said the voice
inside. "For the love of mercy give me another cup of water to cool my
throat."

The prince ran and fetched the water and poured it through the hole in
the lid, and now three more of the iron bands burst asunder.

"More water, brother; more, for the love of mercy," cried the voice.
"That still is not enough to quench my thirst."

The prince fetched a third cup of water and poured it into the chest,
and now with a sound like thunder the last of the iron bands were
broken, and out from the chest flew a great green dragon. It flew up
through the cellars and out of the castle, and the prince ran after it.

The seven princesses were just coming home, and without even stopping
for a moment the dragon caught up the youngest one in his claws and
flew away with her, and the prince still ran after them shouting
like one distracted. Even after the dragon had disappeared over the
mountains the prince ran on, and when he could no longer run he walked.

On and on he went, and after a while he came to a stream, and in a hole
near it lay a small fish gasping for breath.

"Brother," it cried, "for the love of mercy put me back in the water;
but first take one of my scales, and if you are ever in need rub it and
call upon me, and I may be able to help you."

The prince stooped and took up the fish, but before he put it back in
the water he took from it a tiny scale as it had bade him. This scale
he wrapped carefully in his handkerchief, and journeyed on again,
leaving the fish happy at being again in the stream.

Later on he came to a forest, and under some bushes lay a fox whining
to itself with its paw caught in a trap. "Brother," it called to the
prince as soon as it saw him, "for the love of mercy open this trap and
let me go free. It may be that I may succor you in a time of need."

The prince was sorry for the poor animal, and managed to pry open the
trap.

The fox thanked him, and before it ran away it told him to pull three
hairs from its tail. "If you are ever in need, rub those hairs and call
upon me," it said, "and wherever I am I will hear and come to help you."

The prince thanked him and journeyed on, and in the depths of the
forest he came upon a wolf which was caught by a rock that had fallen
on its paw.

"Help, brother, for the love of mercy," cried the wolf.

The prince managed to roll away the rock, and when the wolf found it
was free it gave him three hairs from its tail. "If you are ever in
need, rub these hairs and call upon me," he said, "and wherever I am I
will come and help you."

The prince thanked him and journeyed on, and before long he came out
of the forest and saw before him a great castle that stood upon a
mountain. While he stood there looking at it the gate opened and out
rode the dragon on a great coal-black horse. Then the prince knew that
this was the place he was in search of. He waited until the dragon had
disappeared, and then he went up to the castle and entered in, and
the very first person he saw was his own dear wife sitting alone and
weeping. As soon as she saw him she jumped up and ran into his arms,
and after they had kissed and caressed each other they began to plan
how they could escape.

Out in the stable was another horse, and this the prince saddled. He
mounted upon it and took the princess up before him, and then they rode
down the mountain and away as fast as they could go.

It was not until evening that the dragon returned to the castle, but
as soon as he came in and found the princess was gone he knew what had
happened, and that she had ridden away with the prince.

Then he took counsel with his coal-black horse, and asked it, "Shall we
ride after them at once, or shall we eat and drink first?"

"Let us eat and drink first," answered the horse, "for even after that
we can easily catch up with them."

So the dragon sat down and ate and drank, and then he mounted his steed
and rode after the runaways. He soon caught up with them, and took the
princess from the prince, and set her on his own horse in front of him.
"This one time I will spare you," he said to the prince, "because you
had mercy upon me when I was a prisoner in the cellar, but if you ever
come to my castle again I will certainly destroy you." Then he rode
back home again faster than the wind, carrying the princess with him.

The prince waited until he was out of sight, and then he turned the
horse loose and started back toward the castle, for even the dragon's
threat could not keep him away from his dear princess.

When he had come within sight of the castle again he hid himself and
waited until the next day when the dragon had ridden away. Then he
went up to the castle and hunted through the rooms until he found the
princess.

When she saw him she began to tremble with fear and wring her hands.
"Why have you returned?" she cried. "Do you not remember that if the
dragon finds you here he will tear you to pieces?"

"Listen, dear one," said the prince. "I will hide myself behind the
curtains, and when the dragon comes home you must find out from him
where he got his coal-black steed, for I can easily see that unless we
find a match to it we will never be able to escape from him."

This the princess agreed to do, and they talked together until they
heard the dragon returning, and then the prince hid himself back of the
curtains.

When the dragon came in the princess pretended to be very glad to see
him, and at this he was delighted, for always before she had met him
with tears and reproaches.

After a time she said, "That is a very wonderful horse that you have.
Do you suppose there is another one like it in all the world?"

"Yes," said the dragon, "there is one and only one, and that is the
brother of my steed."

The princess asked him where this wonderful steed was to be found,
and the dragon told her it belonged to the old gray woman who had but
one eye and lived at such and such a place. "She has twelve beautiful
horses standing in her stable," the dragon went on, "but this steed is
none of them. It is the lean and sorry nag that is crowded away in the
furthest stall, and no one to look at it would think it worth anything,
but all the same it is the brother of my horse, and to the full as good
as he is."

"And would it be possible for anyone to get that horse?" asked the
princess.

"Possible but difficult. If anyone serves the old gray woman for three
days, and during that time is able to fulfill her bidding he will be
able to ask his own reward and she cannot refuse him; in that way can
he gain possession of that horse and in no other."

The prince heard all this behind the curtain where he was hidden, and
after a time, when the dragon had gone to sleep he stole out and set
forth in search of the old gray woman who had but one eye.

He went on and on, and after a while he came to the house and there was
the old gray woman herself looking out of the window.

He knocked at the door, and when she opened it he asked whether he
might take service with her.

"Yes, you may," answered the old gray woman, "for I am in need of a
stout lad to drive my black mare out to the pasture and keep her from
running away. If you can do this for three days you may ask what reward
you choose and it shall be yours, but if you are not able to bring her
home every evening your head shall be cut from your shoulders and set
upon a stake."

The prince agreed to this bargain, and the next morning, as soon as
it was light, he drove the black mare out to the pasture. Before they
started however the old woman went to the black mare's stall and
whispered in her ear, "To-day you must change yourself into a fish and
hide down in the stream for there the lad will never be able to find
you."

When the prince reached the pasture with the mare he determined to sit
upon her back all day, for if he did that he was sure she could never
escape from him. He sat there for a long time, but he grew drowsier and
drowsier, and at last he fell fast asleep. When he awoke he was seated
on a log of wood with the halter still in his hand, and the mare was
gone.

The prince was in despair, but suddenly he remembered the promise the
little fish had made him. He took out the scale which he had been
carrying all this time, and rubbing it gently he cried:

    "Little fish, if friend indeed,
     Help me in my time of need."

Immediately the little fish stuck its head up from a stream near by.
"What can I do to help you, brother?" it asked.

"Can you tell me where the black mare has gone?" asked the prince.

"Yes; she has changed herself into a fish and is hiding down in the
stream with us. But do not trouble yourself about that. Just strike the
halter upon the ground and call out, 'Black mare, black mare, come out
from among the fishes for it is time to go home.'"

The prince did as the fish bade him and as soon as the black mare down
in the stream heard those words it was obliged to come out and take its
natural shape again. The prince then mounted upon it and rode it home.

When they reached the stable the old gray woman was on the watch, and
she could scarcely hide her rage and disappointment at finding the
serving lad had managed to bring the black mare home. However, she bade
him go to the kitchen and get his supper, and she followed the black
mare to the stall. "You fool," she cried, and she was ready to beat it
in her rage, "why did you not hide among the fishes as I bade you?"

"Mistress, I did," answered the mare, "but the fishes are friends of
the lad, and told him where I was, so I was obliged to come forth."

"To-morrow, change yourself into a fox and hide among the pack. There
he will certainly be unable to find you."

After that she went into the kitchen where the lad was eating his
supper.

"Well," she said, "you have done very well so far, but to-morrow is
still another day, and we will see how things go then."

On the morrow the prince rode the black mare out to pasture, and again
he sat on her back so that she should not escape him. After awhile
he fell asleep in spite of himself, and when he awoke he was sitting
astride of a branch with the halter in his hand.

At first the prince did not know what to do; he was in despair. Then
he remembered the promise the fox had made him. He took the hairs and
rubbed them between his fingers.

    "Little fox, if friend indeed,
     Help me in my time of need,"

he said.

Immediately the little red fox came running out of the wood. "What
would you have of me, brother?" he asked.

"Can you tell me where the gray woman's black mare has gone?"

"That is easily answered. She has changed herself into a fox and is
hiding with the pack. Strike the halter on the ground and call out:
'Black mare, black mare, come from among the foxes; it is time to go
home.'"

The prince did as he was told and as soon as the mare heard him calling
to her in this way she was obliged to come out from the pack and take
her real shape, and the prince mounted upon her back and rode her home.

When the witch saw him riding back to the house she ground her teeth
with rage. As soon as she had sent him to the kitchen she went out to
the black mare's stall to beat it. "To the foxes! to the foxes! That
was what I told you," she cried.

"Mistress, I did hide among them as you bade me," answered the mare,
"but this lad is a friend of the foxes too, and they told him where I
was."

"Then to-morrow hide among the wolves," said the old woman. "He will
certainly never look for you there."

The next day it was the same thing over again. The prince sat on the
mare's back so that she should not escape him. After while he went to
sleep, and the mare slipped away from him, but this time it was into a
wolf she changed herself.

When the prince awoke he was in despair, until he remembered that he
had still one friend to help him. He gently rubbed the hairs the wolf
had given him, and said,

    "Kind gray wolf, if friend indeed,
     Help me in my time of need."

Immediately the wolf came galloping out of the wood and asked the
prince what he could do for him.

The prince told him how he had been set to watch the black mare and
had gone to sleep and lost her; "And now," said he, "I fear there is
nothing for me but to lose my head and have it set upon a post."

"That will not happen yet," answered the wolf. "The mare has changed
herself to a wolf and is hiding with the pack. Strike the halter on the
ground and call to her and she will be obliged to come."

The prince did as he was told and called to the mare to come, and she
was obliged to take her real shape and come out to him.

The prince slipped the halter over her head, sprang upon her back and
rode her home.

When the old gray woman saw him coming in this way instead of upon his
feet, she almost burst with rage. However, there was no help for it.
The lad had earned his wages, and have them he must.

"And what is it you will choose?" asked the old gray woman.

"Give me the poor nag that stands in the furthest stall," said the
prince. "It is but a sorry looking beast, but I will be content with
that," answered the prince.

When the old woman heard that she turned green in the face. She offered
him first one and then another of the handsome horses in her stable,
but the lad would have none of them. The sorry nag was his choice
and it alone would he take, and in the end the old woman was obliged
to give it to him. He rode away on it, and it was not the old gray
mother's blessing that went with him.

When they were well out of sight of the house and in the depths of the
forest, the prince alighted and taking out a curry comb he had brought
with him he began to rub and curry the horse, and when he had done that
it shone like burnished silver.

Then he mounted again and rode on until he came to the dragon's castle.
As soon as he drew near, the princess came running down to meet him,
for the dragon was away, and she had been watching from a high tower
and had seen him coming.

He took her up on the saddle before him and turned his horse's head and
rode away from the castle even faster than he had ridden toward it, and
they had journeyed far before the dragon returned home.

As soon as he reached there and found the princess gone he knew what
had happened. Then he said to his horse, "Shall we follow after them
now, or shall we eat and drink first?"

"We have no time for meat or drink now," answered the black horse, "and
it will be all I can do to overtake them, for now they ride my own
brother."

Then the dragon leaped upon his horse, and off they flew, faster than
the wind, in pursuit of the prince and princess. They went on and on,
and after a while the dragon came within sight of them, for though the
white horse was swifter than the wind, too, he carried double and so
could not go at his highest speed.

Nearer and nearer came the dragon and his steed, and the prince began
to beg and plead with his steed to go faster, but it answered, "There
is no need of that, master; only leave everything to me and all will go
well."

Then the black horse came near enough to speak, and he called after
the other, "For mercy's sake go slower, brother. I shall kill myself
running after you."

"There is no need of your doing that," answered the white horse. "Throw
up your heels and rid yourself of the monster that sits upon your back.
You have been his servant too long as it is."

When the black horse heard this he began to plunge and kick up his
heels so that the dragon was thrown from his back and falling upon a
rock he was broken to pieces.

But the black horse came up to his brother, and the prince set the
princess upon his back, while he himself kept the white horse to ride.
So they all journeyed back to the pleasure palace together, and when
the six sisters saw them there were great rejoicings, and they all
lived together happily in the palace forever after.

[Illustration]




MISHOSHA, THE MAGICIAN OF THE LAKE

(_From Tales of the American Indians_)


UPON the borders of a wide and lonely lake lived an Indian with his
wife and two children.

Every day the Indian went off into the forest in search of game, and
after he had gone the woman always sent the two boys down to play by
the edge of the lake. This she did because she had a lover who came to
visit her while her husband was away and she was afraid if her children
saw him they might speak of him before their father.

One day the husband came back from his hunting earlier than usual. He
heard voices in the lodge and stole up to it and peeped in. There he
saw a strange man sitting with his wife and talking to her. The Indian
was so angry that he threw the game down before the door, and strode
off into the forest never to return.

So silently had he come and gone that his wife did not know he had
been there until she came out and saw the game lying near the door
where he had thrown it and his bow and arrows beside it. Then she was
frightened, for she thought he would return later when she was alone
and beat her. She begged her lover to take her with him, and as he
was willing they stole away together, with not a thought of the two
children left playing down by the lake.

After some time had passed the two boys tired of their play and
wondered why their mother did not call them as usual. They grew hungry
and at last came up to the lodge for food. There all was silent and
deserted. There was no sound nor movement except among the leaves
overhead. The boys called aloud, but there was no answer. Beside the
door still lay the game that their father had brought, and to satisfy
their hunger the older brother cut some pieces from it and cooked them
at the fire. When night came they crept into a corner of the lodge and
began to weep. They knew now that they were deserted.

After this the two brothers lived all alone. The older, Panigwun knew
how to shoot, and every day he took his father's bow and arrows and
went off into the forest for game. Almost always he was able to bring
something home with him.

The younger brother did nothing but play. He was very mischievous. One
day when Panigwun was making a fire he carried the bow and arrows down
to the lake, and began to amuse himself by shooting them into the
water. Presently the elder brother saw what he was doing and called to
him not to waste the arrows. The boy only ran further along the shore
and kept on shooting. The elder brother ran after him and took the bow
and arrows from his hands. Out in the lake a number of arrows floated
on the water, and not wishing to lose them Panigwun waded out to get
them. Some were quite far from the shore and by the time he reached the
last one the water was up to his armpits. The younger brother stood on
the shore laughing.

Suddenly from around a bend in the lake appeared a canoe, and in it
sat an old man with streaming gray hair. He held no paddle, but the
canoe swept onward of its own power, for it was a magic canoe, and the
old man was Mishosha, the magician of the lake. When it reached the
spot where Panigwun still stood the magician leaned over the side and
lifted the boy into it. Then he slapped the side of the canoe. "CHEMANN
POLL," he cried. Immediately it turned and sped away toward a large
island that lay in the middle of the lake.

The little boy, when he saw his elder brother being carried away from
him, ran down to the edge of the lake, crying piteously. "Take me
with you! Take me too!" he called. But the canoe still swept onward.
He waded out into the lake as far as he dared, and stood there for
some time weeping and calling his brother's name; but there was no
answer, the canoe had disappeared. At last he turned and waded back to
the shore. Then he threw himself down and wept bitterly. He was now
entirely deserted.

Meanwhile the elder brother had been carried to the island where the
magician lived. It was in vain that he begged to be taken back to his
little brother, or even that the little boy might be taken with them;
the magician made no answer. When the canoe reached the shore of the
island, Mishosha stepped from it, and motioned to Panigwun to follow
him. He led the way back from the water and through bushes and past
rocks and stopped at last before a lodge where two young girls were
busy preparing a meal. They did not speak, but they cast looks of pity
at the companion the magician had brought with him.

Mishosha spoke to the older of the two girls in a harsh voice. "I have
brought you a youth who shall be your husband when you are old enough
to marry. Take him to an empty lodge, and mind, no chattering on the
way or you will be sorry for it."

The girl started when Mishosha spoke to her, and looked at him with
terror. When he had ended she turned to obey him with such haste that
she tripped over a root and fell. The magician laughed a cruel laugh
at the sight of her terror.

When the girl had picked herself up she led the way through the bushes,
Panigwun following her, to where several empty lodges were. Here she
paused, standing with her eyes cast down, and motioned to him to choose
one. The boy looked about him, and was about to enter the one that
seemed the most convenient, but the girl caught him by the arm with
every sign of terror, and dragged him away from it. Panigwun looked
at her with surprise, but she again stood with her eyes bent on the
ground, waiting for him to choose.

"Since you do not wish me to have that one, I will take this," said
Panigwun. He was about to enter another lodge, but again the girl
caught him by the arm and dragged him from it. "Very well," said the
boy impatiently, "since you will not let me choose for myself you
shall choose for me. Which shall I take?"

The girl motioned him to a smaller lodge that stood a little way off by
itself. "I will take that lodge," said Panigwun, "if you will tell me
why you choose it. If you do not tell me I will take one of the larger
ones."

The girl looked about to make sure that no one was near. Then she
whispered hurriedly, "Those are ill-omened lodges. Those who lived in
them went out with Mishosha in his canoe and never returned. But none
has ever stayed in the smaller lodge. Take it." Immediately and without
another word, she slipped away and disappeared in the bushes.

Panigwun entered the lodge, threw himself on the ground and began to
lament. "Oh, my poor little brother! what will you do now?" he cried.
"How will you live now that I have left you. You have not even the
arrows to shoot game, for I carried them away with me. My poor little
brother!"

He lay grieving for a long time, until the light faded and the stars
came out. Suddenly he felt a light touch on his shoulder, and looking
up he again saw the girl who had shown him to the lodge standing beside
him. She laid her fingers on her lips as a sign for silence, and said
in a voice as soft as a breath, "Mishosha is asleep. If we whisper he
will not awaken, for the leaves whisper about him all night, and he
is used to the sound. Down on the beach lies the magic canoe. Take it
and go to visit your brother. Strike it on the side and say CHEMANN
POLL and it will carry you wherever you wish. Only return soon, for if
Mishosha awakens and finds you gone he will suspect me of helping you
and punish me for it."

Panigwun would have thanked the girl, but she had disappeared like a
shadow in the night.

Stealing down to the beach, he stepped into the canoe; he slapped it
on the side and uttered the magic words, and immediately it shot out
over the dark and silent lake, and did not pause until it ran up on the
shore from which Panigwun had waded that morning.

Panigwun leaped from it, and hurried up the beach to the lodge and
looked in. By the faint starlight he could see his little brother lying
asleep near the door, the bow clasped tightly in his hand. The older
brother would have awakened him, but he remembered what the girl had
said, and feared if his brother saw him he would not have the heart
to leave him again. Very quietly he placed beside the child the sheaf
of arrows, and also the food that the magician had sent to his wigwam
for his supper. A moment he lingered, and then, as silently as he had
come, he returned to the canoe, and soon was speeding back again across
the water to the island.

But in the little while that Panigwun had been away the weather had
changed. The sky was overcast, and the first breath of a coming
storm ruffled the dark waters of the lake. He sprang from the canoe
and hastened to his lodge. He had scarcely entered when there was a
brilliant flash of lightning, followed almost immediately by a crash of
thunder.

In the silence that followed Panigwun heard the sound of feet running
toward his lodge, and the next flash of lightning showed him the
magician standing in the doorway. His face was drawn and haggard with
terror. He ran to Panigwun and caught hold of him, and the youth could
feel how he was shaking.

"Oh, my good Panigwun, you are not asleep, are you?" he cried with
chattering teeth. "I could not sleep either. I came to see whether
you were comfortable. Let us sit down and talk. I am not afraid--not
afraid. I have had a curious dream, and I came to talk about dreams."
Again there came a flash of lightning and a crash of thunder. Mishosha
fell on the floor and caught the boy by the feet. "I have never done
you any harm! Say I have never done you any harm. It is the storm
king. He is mightier than I. He is searching for me. Ah!" A flash of
lightning brighter than the rest filled the lodge with light. "Hide me!
hide me, Panigwun. What I did to-day was only in joke. To-morrow I will
take you back to your brother. I always intended to. Only hide me till
this terrible storm is past."

Panigwun took up a blanket and threw it over Mishosha, and the magician
rolled himself up in it, and lay shaken and trembling with fear,
groaning aloud at each flash of lightning brighter than the rest.

Gradually the storm died away; the thunder reverberated more dully
among the distant hills; the lightning grew fainter; the terror of the
storm was over.

Mishosha freed himself from the blanket, rose and walked to the door of
the lodge. There he stood looking out. "The storm has passed," he said
in his ordinary voice. "About dreams, I came to tell you of one I had
had, but it grows late. Some other time I will tell it."

"And you will take me back to-morrow to my brother?" asked the boy.

Mishosha laughed harshly. "We will make no promises to-night. To-morrow
we might think them dreams we had dreamed. Another thing I would say.
Beware how you touch my canoe. And do not have a dream that you can do
anything on this island without my knowing of it." He cast an evil
glance at Panigwun and strode away through the night toward his own
lodge.

The next morning Mishosha said to the boy, "I am going to an island to
gather gulls' eggs, and you will go with me."

"But will you not take me to see my little brother first?"

"Some other time," answered the magician. "We must make an early start
if we are to reach the gulls' island." He stepped into the canoe and
Panigwun followed him. "CHEMANN POLL," he cried, and away they sped
over the water.

The wooded island dropped out of sight behind them, and another island
rose to view. This one was bleak and rocky; over it hovered thousands
of sea gulls, filling the air with their harsh cries. The canoe stopped
beside a rocky ledge, and the magician said to the boy, "Do you go
ashore and gather the gulls' eggs, and I will await you here."

Fearing no evil, Panigwun stepped out on the rocks. Immediately the
canoe slipped out into the deep water. "Oh, gulls," shouted Mishosha
in a loud voice, "I have long wished to make you an offering. Take
this youth as a gift from me. He will serve as food for you and your
children." Then he slapped his canoe upon the side and cried "CHEMANN
POLL." The canoe shot away and was lost to sight, and Panigwun was left
alone on the island.

The gulls rose and circled about him in a cloud. Their harsh cries
deafened him. For a moment he was terrified; then he drew his knife and
called upon his guardian spirit. With one blow he killed the nearest
gull and hung it from his belt. "Man is the master of the birds," he
cried aloud. "Ye are my servants. Take me upon your wings and carry me
back to where I came from."

Immediately the birds settled about him upon the rocks. Panigwun
stepped upon them, and they rose with him in a dense cloud, and carried
him swiftly back to Mishosha's island. As he swept along through the
sky he looked down and saw the canoe speeding across the lake below him.

When the magician reached the island Panigwun was already there and
came to meet him. "You did not wait long enough for me to gather the
gulls' eggs," he said.

Mishosha was wonder-struck at finding him safe when he supposed the
gulls were already feasting upon him.

"I am so forgetful," he stammered. "I forgot I had left you upon
the island. I should have remembered before long, however, and have
returned for you." Within himself he thought, "This boy must have a
very powerful guardian spirit, but all the same to-morrow he shall not
escape me."

The next morning he said to Panigwun, "To-day I am going to take you
to an island covered with precious stones of all kinds. There you may
gather all you wish, and this time I will be careful and not forget
you."

"Will you not take me to see my little brother to-day?" asked Panigwun.

The magician shot an evil glance at him from under his brows. "Some
other day," he answered. "To-day we must go to the treasure island."

Panigwun followed him into the canoe, and again they sped over the
waters of the lake, but this time in a different direction. Soon they
reached a small island as steep and bare as the back of a fish. Among
it's rocks lay a quantity of precious stones of all kinds, diamonds,
emeralds and rubies.

"Look, my son!" said the magician. "Here are all the treasures you
could wish. Step out and gather them."

Panigwun knew that the magician was planning some evil, but it was
useless to disobey him. He landed, and immediately the canoe moved too
far away from the shore for him to reach it.

"Rise, oh, king of the fishes," called the magician in a terrible
voice. "I have long been wishing to offer up a victim to you. Here is a
youth for you. Accept him as my offering." Then he slapped the canoe on
the side and disappeared in the direction of the island.

A moment after the waters were disturbed, they broke in waves upon
the island, and the head of a gigantic pike appeared. He came on
toward Panigwun, his mouth open wide as if to swallow him. The youth
did not lose his courage. He called upon his guardian angel, and then
flourishing his knife he cried, "Man is the master of the fishes. You
are my servant. Come here and take me on your back, and carry me to
Mishosha's island."

At this command the pike came closer and floated beside the island.
Panigwun stepped upon his back and the fish bore him away. So swiftly
they went that they out-sped the canoe. When Mishosha reached the beach
the youth was already there waiting to help him out. The magician
looked at him with surprise and terror. "You here!" he muttered. "I am
so forgetful; but I would soon have remembered you were on the island
and have returned for you."

"I thought I would save you the trouble," answered Panigwun mockingly.

The next morning the magician again called Panigwun to go with him in
his canoe. "And this time I will not forget you," he promised.

Panigwun gave him a look of scorn but said nothing.

On and on the canoe bore them over the surface of the lake further than
they had ever gone before. At last they came to an island upon which
stood one stark pine, and far up near the top of it was a nest. "Look,
my son, in that nest the eagles have their eggs. Do you climb up and
get them for me."

Still in silence Panigwun landed and began to climb the tree, but
before he had more than reached the first branches the pine shot up
to enormous height. Panigwun felt himself being carried further and
further from the earth and toward the sky. From far below he heard the
magician's voice: "Rise, oh, eagles, and take the victim I have brought
you. Ye are the king of the birds and it is proper you should receive
offerings." Then, striking his canoe upon its side he shot rapidly away
over the lake.

Two enormous eagles rose and circled about Panigwun; their wings beat
the air with a sound like thunder and they shrieked fiercely. For a
moment the boy closed his eyes, dizzy with the height from the ground
and the noise; then gathering his courage and commending himself to
his guardian spirit, he drew his knife and flourished it.

"The eagle is t