# The Upanishads (F. Max Müller trans)
Author: Anónimo
Category: 08_espiritualidad
Source: Gutenberg #3283
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:23:15.820945
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by J. C. Byers








                         The Upanishads

                   Translated and Commentated

                               by

                       Swami Paramananda


                From the Original Sanskrit Text


This volume is reverently dedicated to all seekers of truth and
lovers of wisdom




                            Preface



The translator's idea of rendering the Upanishads into clear
simple English, accessible to Occidental readers, had its origin
in a visit paid to a Boston friend in 1909. The gentleman, then
battling with a fatal malady, took from his library shelf a
translation of the Upanishads and, opening it, expressed deep
regret that the obscure and unfamiliar form shut from him what he
felt to be profound and vital teaching.

The desire to unlock the closed doors of this ancient treasure
house, awakened at that time, led to a series of classes on the
Upanishads at The Vedanta Centre of Boston during its early days
in St. Botolph Street. The translation and commentary then given
were transcribed and, after studious revision, were published in
the Centre's monthly magazine, "The Message of the East," in 1913
and 1914.. Still further revision has brought it to its present
form.

So far as was consistent with a faithful rendering of the
Sanskrit text, the Swami throughout his translation has sought to
eliminate all that might seem obscure and confusing to the modern
mind. While retaining in remarkable measure the rhythm and
archaic force of the lines, he has tried not to sacrifice
directness and simplicity of style. Where he has been obliged to
use the Sanskrit term for lack of an exact English equivalent, he
has invariably interpreted it by a familiar English word in
brackets; and everything has been done to remove the sense of
strangeness in order that the Occidental reader may not feel
himself an alien in the new regions of thought opened to him.

Even more has the Swami striven to keep the letter subordinate to
the spirit. Any Scripture is only secondarily an historical
document. To treat it as an object of mere intellectual curiosity
is to cheat the world of its deeper message. If mankind is to
derive the highest benefit from a study of it, its appeal must be
primarily to the spiritual consciousness; and one of the salient
merits of the present translation lies in this, that the
translator approaches his task not only with the grave concern of
the careful scholar, but also with the profound reverence and
fervor of the true devotee.

Editor

Boston, March, 1919




                            Contents



Introduction
Isa-Upanishad
Katha-Upanishad
Kena-Upanishad




                          Introduction



The Upanishads represent the loftiest heights of ancient
Indo-Aryan thought and culture. They form the wisdom portion or
Gnana-Kanda of the Vedas, as contrasted with the Karma-Kanda or
sacrificial portion. In each of the four great Vedas--known as
Rik, Yajur, Sama and Atharva--there is a large portion which
deals predominantly with rituals and ceremonials, and which has
for its aim to show man how by the path of right action he may
prepare himself for higher attainment. Following this in each
Veda is another portion called the Upanishad, which deals wholly
with the essentials of philosophic discrimination and ultimate
spiritual vision. For this reason the Upanishads are known as the
Vedanta, that is, the end or final goal of wisdom (Veda, wisdom;
anta, end).

The name Upanishad has been variously interpreted. Many claim
that it is a compound Sanskrit word Upa-ni-shad, signifying
"sitting at the feet or in the presence of a teacher"; while
according to other authorities it means "to shatter" or "to
destroy" the fetters of ignorance. Whatever may have been the
technical reason for selecting this name, it was chosen
undoubtedly to give a picture of aspiring seekers "approaching"
some wise Seer in the seclusion of an Himalayan forest, in order
to learn of him the profoundest truths regarding the cosmic
universe and God. Because these teachings were usually given in
the stillness of some distant retreat, where the noises of the
world could not disturb the tranquillity of the contemplative
life, they are known also as Aranyakas, Forest Books. Another
reason for this name may be found in the fact that they were
intended especially for the Vanaprasthas (those who, having
fulfilled all their duties in the world, had retired to the
forest to devote themselves to spiritual study).

The form which the teaching naturally assumed was that of
dialogue, a form later adopted by Plato and other Greek
philosophers. As nothing was written and all instruction was
transmitted orally, the Upanishads are called Srutis, "what is
heard." The term was also used in the sense of revealed, the
Upanishads being regarded as direct revelations of God; while the
Smritis, minor Scriptures "recorded through memory," were
traditional works of purely human origin. It is a significant
fact that nowhere in the Upanishads is mention made of any author
or recorder.

No date for the origin of the Upanishads can be fixed, because
the written text does not limit their antiquity. The word Sruti
makes that clear to us. The teaching probably existed ages before
it was set down in any written form. The text itself bears
evidence of this, because not infrequently in a dialogue between
teacher and disciple the teacher quotes from earlier Scriptures
now unknown to us. As Professor Max Mller states in his lectures
on the Vedanta Philosophy: "One feels certain that behind all
these lightning-flashes of religious and philosophic thought
there is a distant past, a dark background of which we shall
never know the beginning." Some scholars place the Vedic period
as far back as 4000 or 5000 B.C.; others from 2000 to 1400 B.C.
But even the most conservative admit that it antedates, by
several centuries at least, the Buddhistic period which begins in
the sixth century B.C.

The value of the Upanishads, however, does not rest upon their
antiquity, but upon the vital message they contain for all times
and all peoples. There is nothing peculiarly racial or local in
them. The ennobling lessons of these Scriptures are as practical
for the modern world as they were for the Indo-Aryans of the
earliest Vedic age. Their teachings are summed up in two
Maha-Vakyam or "great sayings":--Tat twam asi (That thou art) and
Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman). This oneness of Soul and God lies
at the very root of all Vedic thought, and it is this dominant
ideal of the unity of all life and the oneness of Truth which
makes the study of the Upanishads especially beneficial at the
present moment.

One of the most eminent of European Orientalists writes: "If we
fix our attention upon it (this fundamental dogma of the Vedanta
system) in its philosophical simplicity as the identity of God
and the Soul, the Brahman and the Atman, it will be found to
possess a significance reaching far beyond the Upanishads, their
time and country; nay, we claim for it an inestimable value for
the whole race of mankind.

Whatever new and unwonted paths the philosophy of the future may
strike out, this principle will remain permanently unshaken and
from it no deviation can possibly take place. If ever a general
solution is reached of the great riddle . . . the key can only be
found where alone the secret of nature lies open to us from
within, that is to say, in our innermost self. It was here that
for the first time the original thinkers of the Upanishads, to
their immortal honor, found it...."

The first introduction of the Upanishads to the Western world was
through a translation into Persian made in the seventeenth
century. More than a century later the distinguished French
scholar, Anquetil Duperron, brought a copy of the manuscript from
Persia to France and translated it into French and Latin.
Publishing only the Latin text. Despite the distortions which
must have resulted from transmission through two alien languages,
the light of the thought still shone with such brightness that it
drew from Schopenhauer the fervent words: "How entirely does the
Oupnekhat (Upanishad) breathe throughout the holy spirit of the
Vedas! How is every one, who by a diligent study of its Persian
Latin has become familiar with that incomparable book, stirred by
that spirit to the very depth of his Soul! From every sentence
deep, original and sublime thoughts arise, and the whole is
pervaded by a high and holy and earnest spirit." Again he says:
"The access to (the Vedas) by means of the Upanishads is in my
eyes the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818)
may claim before all previous centuries." This testimony is borne
out by the thoughtful American scholar, Thoreau, who writes:
"What extracts from the Vedas I have read fall on me like the
light of a higher and purer luminary which describes a loftier
course through a purer stratum  free from particulars, simple,
universal."

The first English translation was made by a learned Hindu, Raja
Ram Mohun Roy (1775-1833). Since that time there have been
various European translations--French, German, Italian and
English. But a mere translation, however accurate and
sympathetic, is not sufficient to make the Upanishads accessible
to the Occidental mind. Professor Max Mller after a lifetime of
arduous labor in this field frankly confesses: "Modern words are
round, ancient words are square, and we may as well hope to solve
the quadrature of the circle, as to express adequately the
ancient thought of the Vedas in modern English."

Without a commentary it is practically impossible to understand
either the spirit or the meaning of the Upanishads. They were
never designed as popular Scriptures. They grew up essentially as
text books of God-knowledge and Self-knowledge, and like all text
books they need interpretation. Being transmitted orally from
teacher to disciple, the style was necessarily extremely
condensed and in the form of aphorisms. The language also was
often metaphorical and obscure. Yet if one has the perseverance
to penetrate beneath these mere surface difficulties, one is
repaid a hundredfold; for these ancient Sacred Books contain the
most precious gems of spiritual thought.

Every Upanishad begins with a Peace Chant (Shanti-patha) to
create the proper atmosphere of purity and serenity. To study
about God the whole nature must be prepared, so unitedly and with
loving hearts teacher and disciples prayed to the Supreme Being
for His grace and protection. It is not possible to comprehend
the subtle problems of life unless the thought is tranquil and
the energy concentrated. Until our mind is withdrawn from the
varied distractions and agitations of worldly affairs, we cannot
enter into the spirit of higher religious study. No study is of
avail so long as our inner being is not attuned. We must hold a
peaceful attitude towards all living things; and if it is
lacking, we must strive fervently to cultivate it through
suggestion by chanting or repeating some holy text. The same
lesson is taught by Jesus the Christ when He says: "If thou bring
thy gift to the altar and there rememberest that thy brother hath
aught against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar and go
thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift."

Bearing this lofty ideal of peace in our minds, let us try to
make our hearts free from prejudice, doubt and intolerance, so
that from these sacred writings we may draw in abundance
inspiration, love and wisdom.

Paramananda



                         Isa-Upanishad




This Upanishad desires its title from the opening words
Isa-vasya, "God-covered."  The use of Isa (Lord)--a more personal
name of the Supreme Being than Brahman, Atman or Self, the names
usually found in the Upanishads--constitutes one of its
peculiarities.   It forms the closing chapter of the Yajur-Veda,
known as Shukla (White).

Oneness of the Soul and God, and the value of both faith and
works as means of ultimate attainment are the leading themes of
this Upanishad.   The general teaching of the Upanishads is that
works alone, even the highest, can bring only temporary happiness
and must inevitably bind a man unless through them he gains
knowledge of his real Self.   To help him acquire this knowledge
is the aim of this and all Upanishads.






                         Isa-Upanishad



Peace Chant

OM!  That (the Invisible-Absolute) is whole; whole is this (the
visible phenomenal); from the Invisible Whole comes forth the
visible whole.  Though the visible whole has come out from that
Invisible Whole, yet the Whole remains unaltered.

OM!  PEACE!  PEACE!  PEACE!

The indefinite term "That" is used in the Upanishads to designate the
Invisible-Absolute, because no word or name can fully define It.  A finite
object, like a table or a tree, can be defined; but God, who is infinite and
unbounded, cannot be expressed by finite language.  Therefore the Rishis or
Divine Seers, desirous not to limit the Unlimited, chose the indefinite term
"That" to designate the Absolute.

In the light of true wisdom the phenomenal and the Absolute are inseparable.
All existence is in the Absolute; and whatever exists, must exist in It; hence
all manifestation is merely a modification of the One Supreme Whole, and
neither increases nor diminishes It.  The Whole therefore remains unaltered.


I

All this, whatsoever exists in the universe, should be covered by
the Lord.  Having renounced (the unreal), enjoy (the Real).  Do
not covet the wealth of any man.

We cover all things with the Lord by perceiving the Divine Presence
everywhere.  When the consciousness is firmly fixed in God, the conception of
diversity naturally drops away; because the One Cosmic Existence shines
through all things.  As we gain the light of wisdom, we cease to cling to the
unrealities of this world and we find all our joy in the realm of Reality.

The word "enjoy" is also interpreted by the great commentator Sankaracharya as
"protect," because knowledge of our true Self is the greatest protector and
sustainer.  If we do not have this knowledge, we cannot be happy; because
nothing on this external plane of phenomena is permanent or dependable.  He
who is rich in the knowledge of the Self does not covet external power or
possession.


II

If one should desire to live in this world a hundred years, one
should live performing Karma (righteous deeds).  Thus thou mayest
live; there is no other way.  By doing this, Karma (the fruits of
thy actions) will not defile thee.

If a man still clings to long life and earthly possessions, and
is therefore unable to follow the path of Self-knowledge
(Gnana-Nishta) as prescribed in the first Mantram (text), then he
may follow the path of right action (Karma-Nishta).  Karma here
means actions performed without selfish motive, for the sake of
the Lord alone.  When a man performs actions clinging blindly to
his lower desires, then his actions bind him to the plane of
ignorance or the plane of birth and death; but when the same
actions are performed with surrender to God, they purify and
liberate him.


III

After leaving their bodies, they who have killed the Self go to
the worlds of the Asuras, covered with blinding ignorance.

The idea of rising to bright regions as a reward for well-doers, and of
falling into realms of darkness as a punishment for evil-doers is common to
all great religions.  But Vedanta claims that this condition of heaven and
hell is only temporary; because our actions, being finite, can produce only a
finite result.

What does it mean "to kill the Self?" How can the immortal Soul ever be
destroyed? It cannot be destroyed, it can only be obscured.  Those who hold
themselves under the sway of ignorance, who serve the flesh and neglect the
Atman or the real Self, are not able to perceive the effulgent and
indestructible nature of their Soul; hence they fall into the realm where the
Soul light does not shine.  Here the Upanishad shows that the only hell is
absence of knowledge.  As long as man is overpowered by the darkness of
ignorance, he is the slave of Nature and must accept whatever comes as the
fruit of his thoughts and deeds.  When he strays into the path of unreality,
the Sages declare that he destroys himself; because he who clings to the
perishable body and regards it as his true Self must experience death many
times.


IV

That One, though motionless, is swifter than the mind.  The
senses can never overtake It, for It ever goes before.  Though
immovable, It travels faster than those who run.  By It the
all-pervading air sustains all living beings.

This verse explains the character of the Atman or Self.  A finite
object can be taken from one place and put in another, but it can
only occupy one space at a time.  The Atman, however, is present
everywhere; hence, though one may run with the greatest swiftness
to overtake It, already It is there before him.

Even the all-pervading air must be supported by this Self, since
It is infinite; and as nothing can live without breathing air,
all living things must draw their life from the Cosmic Self.


V

It moves and It moves not.  It is far and also It is near.  It is
within and also It is without all this.

It is near to those who have the power to understand It, for It dwells in the
heart of every one; but It seems far to those whose mind is covered by the
clouds of sensuality and self-delusion.  It is within, because It is the
innermost Soul of all creatures; and It is without as the essence of the whole
external universe, infilling it like the all-pervading ether.


VI

He who sees all beings in the Self and the Self in all beings, he
never turns away from It (the Self).


VII

He who perceives all beings as the Self for him how can there be
delusion or grief, when he sees this oneness (everywhere)?

He who perceives the Self everywhere never shrinks from anything, because
through his higher consciousness he feels united with all life.  When a man
sees God in all beings and all beings in God, and also God dwelling in his own
Soul, how can he hate any living thing? Grief and delusion rest upon a belief
in diversity, which leads to competition and all forms of selfishness.  With
the realization of oneness, the sense of diversity vanishes and the cause of
misery is removed.


VIII

He (the Self) is all-encircling, resplendent, bodiless, spotless,
without sinews, pure, untouched by sin, all-seeing, all-knowing,
transcendent, self-existent; He has disposed all things duly for
eternal years.

This text defines the real nature of the Self.  When our mind is cleansed from
the dross of matter, then alone can we behold the vast, radiant, subtle,
ever-pure and spotless Self, the true basis of our existence.


IX

They enter into blind darkness who worship Avidya (ignorance and
delusion); they fall, as it were, into greater darkness who
worship Vidya (knowledge).


X

By Vidya one end is attained; by Avidya, another.  Thus we have
heard from the wise men who taught this.


XI

He who knows at the same time both Vidya and Avidya, crosses over
death by Avidya and attains immortality through Vidya.

Those who follow or "worship" the path of selfishness and pleasure (Avidya),
without knowing anything higher, necessarily fall into darkness; but those who
worship or cherish Vidya (knowledge) for mere intellectual pride and
satisfaction, fall into greater darkness, because the opportunity which they
misuse is greater.

In the subsequent verses Vidya and Avidya are used in something the same sense
as "faith" and "works" in the Christian Bible; neither alone can lead to the
ultimate goal, but when taken together they carry one to the Highest.  Work
done with unselfish motive purifies the mind and enables man to perceive his
undying nature.  From this he gains inevitably a knowledge of God, because the
Soul and God are one and inseparable; and when he knows himself to be one with
the Supreme and Indestructible Whole, he realizes his immortality.


XII

They fall into blind darkness who worship the Unmanifested and
they fall into greater darkness who worship the manifested.


XIII

By the worship of the Unmanifested one end is attained; by the
worship of the manifested, another.  Thus we have heard from the
wise men who taught us this.


XIV

He who knows at the same time both the Unmanifested (the cause of
manifestation) and the destructible or manifested, he crosses
over death through knowledge of the destructible and attains
immortality through knowledge of the First Cause (Unmanifested).

This particular Upanishad deals chiefly with the Invisible Cause and the
visible manifestation, and the whole trend of its teaching is to show that
they are one and the same, one being the outcome of the other hence no perfect
knowledge is possible without simultaneous comprehension of both.  The wise
men declare that he who worships in a one-sided way, whether the visible or
the invisible, does not reach the highest goal.  Only he who has a
co-ordinated understanding of both the visible and the invisible, of matter
and spirit, of activity and that which is behind activity, conquers Nature and
thus overcomes death.  By work, by making the mind steady and by following the
prescribed rules given in the Scriptures, a man gains wisdom.  By the light of
that wisdom he is able to perceive the Invisible Cause in all visible forms.
Therefore the wise man sees Him in every manifested form.  They who have a
true conception of God are never separated from Him.  They exist in Him and He
in them.


XV

The face of Truth is hidden by a golden disk.  O Pushan
(Effulgent Being)!  Uncover (Thy face) that I, the worshipper of
Truth, may behold Thee.


XVI

O Pushan!  O Sun, sole traveller of the heavens, controller of
all, son of Prajapati, withdraw Thy rays and gather up Thy
burning effulgence.  Now through Thy Grace I behold Thy blessed
and glorious form.  The Purusha (Effulgent Being) who dwells
within Thee, I am He.

Here the sun, who is the giver of all light, is used as the symbol of the
Infinite, giver of all wisdom.  The seeker after Truth prays to the Effulgent
One to control His dazzling rays, that his eyes, no longer blinded by them,
may behold the Truth.  Having perceived It, he proclaims: "Now I see that that
Effulgent Being and I are one and the same, and my delusion is destroyed." By
the light of Truth he is able to discriminate between the real and the unreal,
and the knowledge thus gained convinces him that he is one with the Supreme;
that there is no difference between himself and the Supreme Truth; or as
Christ said, "I and my Father are one."


XVII

May my life-breath go to the all-pervading and immortal Prana,
and let this body be burned to ashes.  Om!  O mind, remember thy
deeds!  O mind, remember, remember thy deeds!  Remember!

Seek not fleeting results as the reward of thy actions, O mind!  Strive only
for the Imperishable.  This Mantram or text is often chanted at the hour of
death to remind one of the perishable nature of the body and the eternal
nature of the Soul.  When the clear vision of the distinction between the
mortal body and the immortal Soul dawns in the heart, then all craving for
physical pleasure or material possession drops away; and one can say, let the
body be burned to ashes that the Soul may attain its freedom; for death is
nothing more than the casting-off of a worn-out garment.


XVIII

O Agni (Bright Being)!  Lead us to blessedness by the good path.
O Lord!  Thou knowest all our deeds, remove all evil and delusion
from us.  To Thee we offer our prostrations and supplications
again and again.


Here ends this Upanishad



This Upanishad is called Isa-Vasya-Upanishad, that which gives
Brahma-Vidya or knowledge of the All-pervading Deity.  The
dominant thought running through it is that we cannot enjoy life
or realize true happiness unless we consciously "cover" all with
the Omnipresent Lord.  If we are not fully conscious of that
which sustains our life, how can we live wisely and perform our
duties? Whatever we see, movable or immovable, good or bad, it is
all "That." We must not divide our conception of the universe;
for in dividing it, we have only fragmentary knowledge and we
thus limit ourselves.

He who sees all beings in his Self and his Self in all beings, he
never suffers; because when he sees all creatures within his true
Self, then jealousy, grief and hatred vanish.  He alone can love.
That AH-pervading One is self- effulgent, birthless, deathless,
pure, untainted by sin and sorrow.  Knowing this, he becomes free
from the bondage of matter and transcends death.  Transcending
death means realizing the difference between body and Soul and
identifying oneself with the Soul.  When we actually behold the
undecaying Soul within us and realize our true nature, we no
longer identify ourself with the body which dies and we do not
die with the body.

Self-knowledge has always been the theme of the Sages; and the
Upanishads deal especially with the knowledge of the Self and
also with the knowledge of God, because there is no difference
between the Self and God.  They are one and the same.  That which
comes out of the Infinite Whole must also be infinite; hence the
Self is infinite.  That is the ocean, we are the drops.  So long
as the drop remains separate from the ocean, it is small and
weak; but when it is one with the ocean, then it has all the
strength of the ocean.  Similarly, so long as man believes
himself to be separate from the Whole, he is helpless; but when
he identifies himself with It, then he transcends all weakness
and partakes of Its omnipotent qualities.






                        Katha-Upanishad




The Katha-Upanishad is probably the most widely known of all the
Upanishads.  It was early translated into Persian and through
this rendering first made its way into Europe.  Later Raja Ram
Mohun Roy brought out an English version.  It has since appeared
in various languages; and English, German and French writers are
all agreed in pronouncing it one of the most perfect expressions
of the religion and philosophy of the Vedas.  Sir Edwin Arnold
popularized it by his metrical rendering under the name of "The
Secret of Death," and Ralph Waldo Emerson gives its story in
brief at the close of his essay on "Immortality."

There is no consensus of opinion regarding the place of this
Upanishad in Vedic literature.  Some authorities declare it to
belong to the Yajur-Veda, others to the Sama-Veda, while a large
number put it down as a part of the Atharva-Veda.  The story is
first suggested in the Rig-Veda; it is told more definitely in
the Yajur-Veda; and in the Katha-Upanishad it appears fully
elaborated and interwoven with the loftiest Vedic teaching.
There is nothing however, to indicate the special place of this
final version, nor has any meaning been found for the name Katha.

The text presents a dialogue between an aspiring disciple,
Nachiketas, and the Ruler of Death regarding the great Hereafter.




                        Katha-Upanishad



Peace Chant

May He (the Supreme Being) protect us both, teacher and taught.
May He be pleased with us. May we acquire strength.  May our
study bring us illumination.  May there be no enmity among us.

OM! PEACE! PEACE! PEACE!




                           Part First



I

Vahasrava, being desirous of heavenly rewards (at the Viswajit
sacrifice), made a gift of all that he possessed.  He had a son
by the name of Nachiketas.


II

When the offerings were being distributed, faith (Shraddha)
entered (the heart of) Nachiketas, who, though young, yet
resected:


III

These cows have drunk water, eaten grass and given milk for the
last time, and their senses have lost all vigour.  He who gives
these undoubtedly goes to joyless realms.

In India the idea of sacrifice has always been to give freely for the joy of
giving, without asking anything in return; and the whole purpose and merit of
the sacrifice is lost, if the giver entertains the least thought of name, fame
or individual benefit.  The special Viswajit sacrifice which Vajasrava was
making required of him to give away all that he possessed.  When, however, the
gifts were brought forward to be offered, his son Nachiketas, although
probably a lad about twelve years of age, observed how worthless were the
animals which his father was offering.  His heart at once became filled with
Shraddha.  There is no one English word which can convey the meaning of this
Sanskrit term.  It is more than mere faith.  It also implies self-reliance, an
independent sense of right and wrong, and the courage of one's own conviction.
As a boy of tender age, Nachiketas had no right to question his father's
action; yet, impelled by the sudden awakening of his higher nature, he could
not but reflect: "By merely giving these useless cows, my father cannot gain
any merit.  If he has vowed to give all his possessions, then he must also
give me.  Otherwise his sacrifice will not be complete and fruitful."
Therefore, anxious for his father's welfare, he approached him gently and
reverently.


IV

He said to his father: Dear father, to whom wilt thou give me?
He said it a second time, then a third time.  The father replied:
I shall give thee unto Death.

Nachiketas, being a dutiful son and eager to atone for his father's inadequate
sacrifice, tried to remind him thus indirectly that he had not fulfilled his
promise to give away all his possessions, since he had not yet offered his own
son, who would be a worthier gift than useless cattle.  His father, conscious
that he was not making a true sacrifice, tried to ignore the boy's questions;
but irritated by his persistence, he at last impatiently made answer: "I give
thee to Yama, the Lord of Death."  The fact that anger could so quickly rise
in his heart proved that he had not the proper attitude of a sacrificer, who
must always be tranquil, uplifted and free from egoism.


V

Nachiketas thought: Among many (of my father's pupils) I stand
first; among many (others) I stand in the middle (but never
last). What will be accomplished for my father by my going this
day to Yama?

It was not conceit which led Nachiketas to consider his own standing and
importance.  He was weighing his value as a son and pupil in order to be able
to judge whether or not he had merit enough to prove a worthy gift.  Although
he realized that his father's harsh reply was only the expression of a
momentary outburst of anger; yet he believed that greater harm might befall
his father, if his word was not kept.  Therefore he sought to strengthen his
father's resolution by reminding him of the transitory condition of life. He
said:


VI

Look back to those who lived before and look to those who live
now.  Like grain the mortal decays and like grain again springs
up (is reborn).

All things perish, Truth alone remains.  Why then fear to sacrifice me also;
Thus Nachiketas convinced his father that he should remain true to his word
and send him to Yama, the Ruler of Death.  Then Nachiketas went to the abode
of Death, but Yama was absent and the boy waited without food or drink for
three days.  On Yama's return one of his household said to him:


VII

Like fire a Brahmana guest enters into houses.  That fire is
quenched by an offering.  (Therefore) O Vaivaswata, bring water.


VIII

The foolish man in whose house a Brahmana guest remains without
food, all his hopes and expectations, all the merit gained by his
association with the holy, by his good words and deeds, all his
sons and cattle, are destroyed.

According to the ancient Vedic ideal a guest is the
representative of God and should be received with due reverence
and honor.  Especially is this the case with a Brahmana or a
Sannyasin whose life is wholly consecrated to God.  Any one who
fails to give proper care to a holy guest brings misfortune on
himself and his household.  When Yama returned, therefore, one of
the members of his household anxiously informed him of
Nachiketas' presence and begged him to bring water to wash his
feet, this being always the first service to an arriving guest.


IX

Yama said: O Brahmana!  Revered guest!  My salutations to thee.
As thou hast remained three nights in my house without food,
therefore choose three boons, O Brahmana.


X

Nachiketas said: May Gautama, my father, be free from anxious
thought (about me).  May he lose all anger (towards me) and be
pacified in heart.  May he know and welcome me when I am sent
back by thee.  This, O Death, is the first of the three boons I
choose.


XI

Yama replied: Through my will Auddalaki Aruni (thy father) will
know thee, and be again towards thee as before.  He will sleep in
peace at night.  He will be free from wrath when he sees thee
released from the mouth of death.

XII

Nachiketas said: In the realm of heaven there is no fear, thou
(Death) art not there; nor is there fear of old age.  Having
crossed beyond both hunger and thirst and being above grief,
(they) rejoice in heaven.


XIII

Thou knowest, O Death, the fire-sacrifice that leads to heaven.
Tell this to me, who am full of Shraddha (faith and yearning).
They who live in the realm of heaven enjoy freedom from death.
This I beg as my second boon.


XIV

Yama replied: I know well that fire which leads to the realm of
heaven.  I shall tell it to thee.  Listen to me.  Know, O
Nachiketas, that this is the means of attaining endless worlds
and their support.  It is hidden in the heart of all beings.


XV

Yama then told him that fire-sacrifice, the beginning of all the
worlds; what bricks, how many and how laid for the altar.
Nachiketas repeated all as it was told to him.  Then Death, being
pleased with him, again said:


XVI

The great-soured Yama, being well pleased, said to him
(Nachiketas): I give thee now another boon.  This fire
(sacrifice) shall be named after thee.  Take also this garland of
many colours.


XVII

He who performs this Nachiketa fire-sacrifice three times, being
united with the three (mother, father and teacher), and who
fulfills the three-fold duty (study of the Vedas, sacrifice and
alms-giving) crosses over birth and death.  Knowing this
worshipful shining fire, born of Brahman, and realizing Him, he
attains eternal peace.


XVIII

He who knows the three-fold Nachiketa fire and performs the
Nachiketa fire-sacrifice with three-fold knowledge, having cast
off the fetters of death and being beyond grief, he rejoices in
the realm of heaven.


XIX

O Nachiketas, this is thy fire that leads to heaven, which thou
hast chosen as thy second boon.  People will call this fire after
thy name.  Ask the third boon, Nachiketas.

Fire is regarded as "the foundation of all the worlds," because
it is the revealer of creation.  If there were no fire or light,
no manifested form would be visible.  We read in the Semitic
Scriptures, "In the beginning the Lord said, 'Let there be
light."'  Therefore, that which stands in the external universe
as one of the purest symbols of the Divine, also dwells in subtle
form in the heart of every living being as the vital energy, the
life-force or cause of existence.

Yama now tells Nachiketas how, by performing sacrifice with the
three-fold knowledge, he may transcend grief and death and reach
heaven.  The three-fold knowledge referred to is regarding the
preparation of the altar and fire.  Nachiketas being eager to
learn, listened with wholehearted attention and was able to
repeat all that was told him.  This so pleased Yama that he
granted him the extra boon of naming the fire-sacrifice after him
and gave him a garland set with precious stones.

Verses XVI-XVIII are regarded by many as an interpolation, which
would account for certain obscurities and repetitions in them.


XX

Nachiketas said: There is this doubt regarding what becomes of a
man after death.  Some say he exists, others that he does not
exist.  This knowledge I desire, being instructed by thee.  Of
the boons this is the third boon.


XXI

Yama replied: Even the Devas (Bright Ones) of old doubted
regarding this.  It is not easy to know; subtle indeed is this
subject.  O Nachiketas, choose another boon.  Do not press me.
Ask not this boon of me.


XXII

Nachiketas said: O Death, thou sayest that even the Devas had
doubts about this, and that it is not easy to know.  Another
teacher like unto thee is not to be found.  Therefore no other
boon can be equal to this one.

 XXIII

Yama said: Ask for sons and grandsons who shall live a hundred
years, many cattle, elephants, gold and horses.  Ask for lands of
vast extent and live thyself as many autumns as thou desirest.


XXIV

If thou thinkest of any other boon equal to this, ask for wealth
and long life; be ruler over the wide earth.  O Nachiketas, I
shall make thee enjoyer of all desires.


XXV

Whatsoever objects of desire are difficult to obtain in the realm
of mortals, ask them all as thou desirest; these lovely maidens
with their chariots and musical instruments, such as are not
obtainable by mortals--be served by these whom I give to thee.  O
Nachiketas, do not ask regarding death.

The third boon asked by Nachiketas concerning the great Hereafter was one
which could be granted only to those who were freed from all mortal desires
and limitations, therefore Yama first tested Nachiketas to see whether he was
ready to receive such knowledge.  "Do not press me regarding this secret," he
said.  "Even wise men cannot understand it and thou art a mere lad.  Take,
rather, long life, wealth, whatever will give thee happiness on the mortal
plane."  But the boy proved his strength and worthiness by remaining firm in
his resolution to know the great secret of life and death.


XXVI

Nachiketas said: O Death, these are fleeting; they weaken the
vigour of all the senses in man.  Even the longest life is short.
Keep thou thy chariots, dance and music.


XXVII

Man cannot be satisfied by wealth.  Shall we possess wealth when
we see thee (Death)?  Shall we continue to live as long as thou
rulest?  Therefore that boon alone is to be chosen by me.


XXVIII

What man dwelling on the decaying mortal plane, having approached
the undecaying immortal one, and having reflected upon the nature
of enjoyment through beauty and sense pleasure, would delight in
long life?


XXIX

O Death, that regarding which there is doubt, of the great
Hereafter, tell us.  Nachiketas asks for no other boon than that
which penetrates this hidden secret.





                          Part Second



I

Yama said: The good is one thing and the pleasant another.  These
two, having different ends, bind a man.  It is well with him who
chooses the good.  He who chooses the pleasant misses the true
end.


II

The good and the pleasant approach man; the wise examines both
and discriminates between them; the wise prefers the good to the
pleasant, but the foolish man chooses the pleasant through love
of bodily pleasure.


III

O Nachiketas after wise reflection thou hast renounced the
pleasant and all pleasing forms.  Thou hast not accepted this
garland of great value for which many mortals perish.


IV

Wide apart are these two,--ignorance and what is known as wisdom,
leading in opposite directions.  I believe Nachiketas to be one
who longs for wisdom, since many tempting objects have not turned
thee aside.

With this second part, the Ruler of Death begins his instructions regarding
the great Hereafter.  There are two paths,--one leading Godward, the other
leading to worldly pleasure.  He who follows one inevitably goes away from the
other; because, like light and darkness they conflict.  One leads to the
imperishable spiritual realm; the other to the perishable physical realm.
Both confront a man at every step of life.  The discerning man distinguishing
between the two, chooses the Real and Eternal, and he alone attains the
highest, while the ignorant man, preferring that which brings him immediate
and tangible results, misses the true purpose of his existence.  Although Yama
put before Nachiketas many temptations to test his sincerity and earnestness,
he judging them at their real value, refused them all, saying "I have come
from the mortal realm, shall I ask for what is mortal?  I desire only that
which is eternal."  Then Death said to him: "I now see that thou art a sincere
desirer of Truth.  I offered thee vast wealth, long life and every form of
pleasure which tempts and deludes men; but thou hast proved thy worthiness by
rejecting them all."


V

Fools dwelling in ignorance, yet imagining themselves wise and
learned, go round and round in crooked ways, like the blind led
by the blind.


VI

The Hereafter never rises before the thoughtless child (the
ignorant), deluded by the glamour of wealth.  "This world alone
is, there is none other": thinking thus, he falls under my sway
again and again.

There are many in the world, who, puffed up with intellectual conceit, believe
that they are capable of guiding others.  But although they may possess a
certain amount of worldly wisdom, they are devoid of deeper understanding;
therefore all that they say merely increases doubt and confusion in the minds
of those who hear them.  Hence they are likened to blind men leading the
blind.

The Hereafter does not shine before those who are lacking in the power of
discrimination and are easily carried away therefore by the charm of fleeting
objects.  As children are tempted by toys, so they are tempted by pleasure,
power, name and fame.  To them these seem the only realities.  Being thus
attached to perishable things, they come many times under the dominion of
death.  There is one part of us which must die; there is another part which
never dies.  When a man can identify himself with his undying nature, which is
one with God, then he overcomes death.


VII

He about whom many are not even able to hear, whom many cannot
comprehend even after hearing: wonderful is the teacher,
wonderful is he who can receive when taught by an able teacher.

Throughout the Vedic Scriptures it is declared that no one can impart
spiritual knowledge unless he has realization.  What is meant by realization?
It means knowledge based on direct perception.  In India often the best
teachers have no learning, but their character is so shining that every one
learns merely by coming in contact with them.  In one of the Scriptures we
read: Under a banyan tree sat a youthful teacher and beside him an aged
disciple.  The mind of the disciple was full of doubts and questions, but
although the teacher continued silent, gradually every doubt vanished from the
disciple's mind.  This signifies that the conveying of spiritual teaching does
not depend upon words only.  It is the life, the illumination, which counts.
Such God-enlightened men, however, cannot easily be found; but even with such
a teacher, the knowledge of the Self cannot be gained unless the heart of the
disciple is open and ready for the Truth.  Hence Yama says both teacher and
taught must be wonderful.


VIII

When taught by a man of inferior understanding, this Atman cannot
be truly known, even though frequently thought upon.  There is no
way (to know It) unless it is taught by another (an illumined
teacher), for it is subtler than the subtle and beyond argument.


IX

O Dearest, this Atman cannot be attained by argument; It is truly
known only when taught by another (a wise teacher).  O
Nachiketas, thou hast attained It.  Thou art fixed in Truth.  May
we ever, find a questioner like thee.

Knowledge of the Atman or Self cannot be attained when it is taught by those
who themselves lack in real understanding of It; and who therefore, having no
definite conviction of their own, differ among themselves as to its nature and
existence.  Only he who has been able to perceive the Self directly, through
the unfoldment of his higher nature, can proclaim what It actually is; and his
words alone carry weight and bring illumination.  It is too subtle to be
reached by argument.  This secret regarding the Hereafter cannot be known
through reasoning or mere intellectual gymnastics.  It is to be attained only
in a state of consciousness which transcends the boundary line of reason.


X

I know that (earthly) treasure is transitory, for the eternal can
never be attained by things which are non-eternal.  Hence the
Nachiketa fire (sacrifice) has been performed by me with
perishable things and yet I have attained the eternal.


XI

O Nachiketas, thou hast seen the fulfillment of all desires, the
basis of the universe, the endless fruit of sacrificial rites,
the other shore where there is no fear, that which is
praiseworthy, the great and wide support; yet, being wise, thou
hast rejected all with firm resolve.

The teacher, saying that the imperishable cannot be attained by the
perishable, shows that no amount of observance of rituals and ceremonies can
earn the imperishable and eternal.  Although the Nachiketa fire-sacrifice may
bring results which seem eternal to mortals because of their long duration,
yet they too must come to an end; therefore this sacrifice cannot lead to the
final goal.  Yama praises Nachiketas because, when all heavenly and earthly
pleasures, as well as knowledge of all realms and their enjoyments were
offered him, yet he cast them aside and remained firm in his desire for Truth
alone.


XII

The wise, who by means of the highest meditation on the Self
knows the Ancient One, difficult to perceive, seated in the
innermost recess, hidden in the cave of the heart, dwelling in
the depth of inner being, (he who knows that One) as God, is
liberated from the fetters of joy and sorrow.


XIII

A mortal, having heard and fully grasped this, and having
realized through discrimination the subtle Self, rejoices,
because he has obtained that which is the source of all joy. I
think the abode (of Truth) is open to Nachiketas.

The Scriptures give three stages in all spiritual attainment.  The aspirant
must first hear about the Truth from an enlightened teacher; next he must
reflect upon what he has heard; then by constant practice of discrimination
and meditation he realizes it; and with realization comes the fulfilment of
every desire, because it unites him with the source of all.  Having beheld
this, a man learns that all sense pleasures are but fragmentary reflections of
that one supreme joy, which can be found in the true Self alone.  Yama assures
Nachiketas that there is no doubt of his realizing the Truth, because he has
shown the highest discrimination as well as fixity of purpose.


XIV

Nachiketas said: That which thou seest, which is neither virtue
nor vice, neither cause nor effect, neither past nor future (but
beyond these), tell me That.


XV

Yama replied: That goal which all the Vedas glorify, which all
austerities proclaim, desiring which (people) practice
Brahmacharya (a life of continence and service), that goal I tell
thee briefly--it is Aum.

What name can man give to God?  How can the Infinite be bound by any finite
word?  All that language can express must be finite, since it is itself
finite.  Yet it is very difficult for mortals to think or speak of anything
without calling it by a definite name.  Knowing this, the Sages gave to the
Supreme the name A-U-M which stands as the root of all language.  The first
letter "A" is the mother-sound, being the natural sound uttered by every
creature when the throat is opened, and no sound can be made without opening
the throat.  The last letter "M," spoken by closing the lips, terminates all
articulation.  As one carries the sound from the throat to the lips, it passes
through the sound "U."  These three sounds therefore cover the whole field of
possible articulate sound.  Their combination is called the Akshara or the
imperishable word, the Sound-Brahman or the Word God, because it is the most universal name which can be given to the Supreme. Hence it must be the word which was "in the beginning" and corresponds to the Logos of Christian theology.
It is because of the all-embracing significance of this name that it is used
so universally in the Vedic Scriptures to designate the Absolute.


XVI

This Word is indeed Brahman.  This Word is indeed the Supreme.
He who knows this Word obtains whatever he desires.


XVII

This is the best Support, This is the highest Support; he who
knows this Support is glorified in the world of Brahman.

This sacred Word is the highest symbol of the Absolute.  He who through
meditating on It grasps Its full significance, realizes the glory of God and
at once has all his desires satisfied, because God is the fulfilment of all
desires.


XVIII

This Self is never born, nor does It die.  It did not spring from
anything, nor did anyt