# The Bhagavad Gita
Author: Anónimo (Edwin Arnold trans)
Category: 08_espiritualidad
Source: Gutenberg #2388
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:23:18.810861
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by J. C. Byers.  HTML version by Al Haines.









                       The
                 Song Celestial.
                       or
                  Bhagavad-Gita
             (From the Mahabharata)

        Being a Discourse Between Arjuna,
     Prince of India, and the Supreme Being
            Under the Form of Krishna


        Translated from the Sanskrit Text
                       by
                Sir Edwin Arnold,
             M.A., K.C.I.E., C.S.I.

                    New York
         Truslove, Hanson & Comba, Ltd.
                 67 Fifth Avenue
                      1900



Dedication

TO INDIA

So have I read this wonderful and spirit-thrilling speech,
By Krishna and Prince Arjun held, discoursing each with each;
So have I writ its wisdom here,--its hidden mystery,
For England; O our India! as dear to me as She!

EDWIN ARNOLD




PREFACE

This famous and marvellous Sanskrit poem occurs as an episode of the
Mahabharata, in the sixth--or "Bhishma"--Parva of the great Hindoo
epic. It enjoys immense popularity and authority in India, where it is
reckoned as one of the ``Five Jewels,"--pancharatnani--of Devanagiri
literature. In plain but noble language it unfolds a philosophical system
which remains to this day the prevailing Brahmanic belief, blending as it
does the doctrines of Kapila, Patanjali, and the Vedas. So lofty are many
of its declarations, so sublime its aspirations, so pure and tender its
piety, that Schlegel, after his study of the poem, breaks forth into this
outburst of delight and praise towards its unknown author:
"Magistrorum reverentia a Brachmanis inter sanctissima pietatis officia
refertur. Ergo te primum, Vates sanctissime, Numinisque hypopheta!
quisquis tandem inter mortales dictus tu fueris, carminis bujus auctor,,
cujus oraculis mens ad excelsa quaeque,quaeque,, aeterna atque divina,
cum inenarraoih quddam delectatione rapitur-te primum, inquam,
salvere jubeo, et vestigia tua semper adore." Lassen re-echoes this
splendid tribute; and indeed, so striking are some of the moralities here
inculcated, and so close the parallelism--ofttimes actually verbal--
between its teachings and those of the New Testament, that a
controversy has arisen between Pandits and Missionaries on the point
whether the author borrowed from Christian sources, or the Evangelists
and Apostles from him.

This raises the question of its date, which cannot be positively settled. It
must have been inlaid into the ancient epic at a period later than that of
the original Mahabharata, but Mr Kasinath Telang has offered some fair
arguments to prove it anterior to the Christian era. The weight of
evidence, however, tends to place its composition at about the third
century after Christ; and perhaps there are really echoes in this
Brahmanic poem of the lessons of Galilee, and of the Syrian incarnation.

Its scene is the level country between the Jumna and the Sarsooti
rivers-now Kurnul and Jheend. Its simple plot consists of a dialogue held
by Prince Arjuna, the brother of King Yudhisthira, with Krishna, the
Supreme Deity, wearing the disguise of a charioteer. A great battle is
impending between the armies of the Kauravas and Pandavas, and this
conversation is maintained in a war-chariot drawn up between the
opposing hosts.

The poem has been turned into French by Burnouf, into Latin by Lassen,
into Italian by Stanislav Gatti, into Greek by Galanos, and into English
by Mr. Thomson and Mr Davies, the prose transcript of the last-named
being truly beyond praise for its fidelity and clearness. Mr Telang has
also published at Bombay a version in colloquial rhythm, eminently
learned and intelligent, but not conveying the dignity or grace of the
original. If I venture to offer a translation of the wonderful poem after
so many superior scholars, it is in grateful recognition of the help
derived from their labours, and because English literature would
certainly be incomplete without possessing in popular form a poetical
and philosophical work so dear to India.

There is little else to say which the "Song Celestial" does not explain for
itself. The Sanskrit original is written in the Anushtubh metre, which
cannot be successfully reproduced for Western ears. I have therefore
cast it into our flexible blank verse, changing into lyrical measures
where the text itself similarly breaks. For the most part, I believe the
sense to be faithfully preserved in the following pages; but Schlegel
himself had to say: "In reconditioribus me semper poetafoster mentem
recte divinasse affirmare non ausim." Those who would read more upon
the philosophy of the poem may find an admirable introduction in the
volume of Mr Davies, printed by Messrs Trubner & Co.

EDWIN ARNOLD, C.S.I.




CONTENTS

     I. THE DISTRESS OF ARJUNA
    II. THE BOOK OF DOCTRINES
   III. VIRTUE IN WORK
    IV. THE RELIGION OF KNOWLEDGE
     V. RELIGION OF RENOUNCING WORKS
    VI. RELIGION BY SELF-RESTRAINT
   VII. RELIGION BY DISCERNMENT
  VIII. RELIGION BY SERVICE OF THE SUPREME
    IX. RELIGION BY THE KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND THE KINGLY MYSTERY
     X. RELIGION BY THE HEAVENLY PERFECTIONS
    XI. THE MANIFESTING OF THE ONE AND MANIFOLD
   XII. RELIGION OF FAITH
  XIII. RELIGION BY SEPARATION OF MATTER AND SPIRIT
   XIV. RELIGION BY SEPARATION FROM THE QUALITIES
    XV. RELIGION BY ATTAINING THE SUPREME
   XVI. THE SEPARATENESS OF THE DIVINE AND UNDIVINE
  XVII. RELIGION BY THE THREEFOLD FAITH
 XVIII. RELIGION BY DELIVERANCE AND RENUNCIATION




CHAPTER I


  Dhritirashtra:
  Ranged thus for battle on the sacred plain--
  On Kurukshetra--say, Sanjaya! say
  What wrought my people, and the Pandavas?

  Sanjaya:
  When he beheld the host of Pandavas,
  Raja Duryodhana to Drona drew,
  And spake these words: "Ah, Guru! see this line,
  How vast it is of Pandu fighting-men,
  Embattled by the son of Drupada,
  Thy scholar in the war! Therein stand ranked
  Chiefs like Arjuna, like to Bhima chiefs,
  Benders of bows; Virata, Yuyudhan,
  Drupada, eminent upon his car,
  Dhrishtaket, Chekitan, Kasi's stout lord,
  Purujit, Kuntibhoj, and Saivya,
  With Yudhamanyu, and Uttamauj
  Subhadra's child; and Drupadi's;-all famed!
  All mounted on their shining chariots!
  On our side, too,--thou best of Brahmans! see
  Excellent chiefs, commanders of my line,
  Whose names I joy to count: thyself the first,
  Then Bhishma, Karna, Kripa fierce in fight,
  Vikarna, Aswatthaman; next to these
  Strong Saumadatti, with full many more
  Valiant and tried, ready this day to die
  For me their king, each with his weapon grasped,
  Each skilful in the field. Weakest-meseems-
  Our battle shows where Bhishma holds command,
  And Bhima, fronting him, something too strong!
  Have care our captains nigh to Bhishma's ranks
  Prepare what help they may! Now, blow my shell!"

  Then, at the signal of the aged king,
  With blare to wake the blood, rolling around
  Like to a lion's roar, the trumpeter
  Blew the great Conch; and, at the noise of it,
  Trumpets and drums, cymbals and gongs and horns
  Burst into sudden clamour; as the blasts
  Of loosened tempest, such the tumult seemed!
  Then might be seen, upon their car of gold
  Yoked with white steeds, blowing their battle-shells,
  Krishna the God, Arjuna at his side:
  Krishna, with knotted locks, blew his great conch
  Carved of the "Giant's bone;" Arjuna blew
  Indra's loud gift; Bhima the terrible--
  Wolf-bellied Bhima-blew a long reed-conch;
  And Yudhisthira, Kunti's blameless son,
  Winded a mighty shell, "Victory's Voice;"
  And Nakula blew shrill upon his conch
  Named the "Sweet-sounding," Sahadev on his
  Called"Gem-bedecked," and Kasi's Prince on his.
  Sikhandi on his car, Dhrishtadyumn,
  Virata, Satyaki the Unsubdued,
  Drupada, with his sons, (O Lord of Earth!)
  Long-armed Subhadra's children, all blew loud,
  So that the clangour shook their foemen's hearts,
  With quaking earth and thundering heav'n.

  Then 'twas-
  Beholding Dhritirashtra's battle set,
  Weapons unsheathing, bows drawn forth, the war
  Instant to break-Arjun, whose ensign-badge
  Was Hanuman the monkey, spake this thing
  To Krishna the Divine, his charioteer:
  "Drive, Dauntless One! to yonder open ground
  Betwixt the armies; I would see more nigh
  These who will fight with us, those we must slay
  To-day, in war's arbitrament; for, sure,
  On bloodshed all are bent who throng this plain,
  Obeying Dhritirashtra's sinful son."

  Thus, by Arjuna prayed, (O Bharata!)
  Between the hosts that heavenly Charioteer
  Drove the bright car, reining its milk-white steeds
  Where Bhishma led,and Drona,and their Lords.
  "See!" spake he to Arjuna, "where they stand,
  Thy kindred of the Kurus:" and the Prince
  Marked on each hand the kinsmen of his house,
  Grandsires and sires, uncles and brothers and sons,
  Cousins and sons-in-law and nephews, mixed
  With friends and honoured elders; some this side,
  Some that side ranged: and, seeing those opposed,
  Such kith grown enemies-Arjuna's heart
  Melted with pity, while he uttered this:

  Arjuna.
  Krishna! as I behold, come here to shed
  Their common blood, yon concourse of our kin,
  My members fail, my tongue dries in my mouth,
  A shudder thrills my body, and my hair
  Bristles with horror; from my weak hand slips
  Gandiv, the goodly bow; a fever burns
  My skin to parching; hardly may I stand;
  The life within me seems to swim and faint;
  Nothing do I foresee save woe and wail!
  It is not good, O Keshav! nought of good
  Can spring from mutual slaughter! Lo, I hate
  Triumph and domination, wealth and ease,
  Thus sadly won! Aho! what victory
  Can bring delight, Govinda! what rich spoils
  Could profit; what rule recompense; what span
  Of life itself seem sweet, bought with such blood?
  Seeing that these stand here, ready to die,
  For whose sake life was fair, and pleasure pleased,
  And power grew precious:-grandsires, sires, and sons,
  Brothers, and fathers-in-law, and sons-in-law,
  Elders and friends! Shall I deal death on these
  Even though they seek to slay us? Not one blow,
  O Madhusudan! will I strike to gain

  The rule of all Three Worlds; then, how much less
  To seize an earthly kingdom! Killing these
  Must breed but anguish, Krishna! If they be
  Guilty, we shall grow guilty by their deaths;
  Their sins will light on us, if we shall slay
  Those sons of Dhritirashtra, and our kin;
  What peace could come of that, O Madhava?
  For if indeed, blinded by lust and wrath,
  These cannot see, or will not see, the sin
  Of kingly lines o'erthrown and kinsmen slain,
  How should not we, who see, shun such a crime--
  We who perceive the guilt and feel the shame--
  O thou Delight of Men, Janardana?
  By overthrow of houses perisheth
  Their sweet continuous household piety,
  And-rites neglected, piety extinct--
  Enters impiety upon that home;
  Its women grow unwomaned, whence there spring
  Mad passions, and the mingling-up of castes,
  Sending a Hell-ward road that family,
  And whoso wrought its doom by wicked wrath.
  Nay, and the souls of honoured ancestors
  Fall from their place of peace, being bereft
  Of funeral-cakes and the wan death-water.[FN#1]
  So teach our holy hymns. Thus, if we slay
  Kinsfolk and friends for love of earthly power,
  Ahovat! what an evil fault it were!
  Better I deem it, if my kinsmen strike,
  To face them weaponless, and bare my breast
  To shaft and spear, than answer blow with blow.

  So speaking, in the face of those two hosts,
  Arjuna sank upon his chariot-seat,
  And let fall bow and arrows, sick at heart.

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER I. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Arjun-Vishad,"
  Or "The Book of the Distress of Arjuna."




  CHAPTER II


  Sanjaya.
  Him, filled with such compassion and such grief,
  With eyes tear-dimmed, despondent, in stern words
  The Driver, Madhusudan, thus addressed:

  Krishna.
  How hath this weakness taken thee? Whence springs
  The inglorious trouble, shameful to the brave,
  Barring the path of virtue? Nay, Arjun!
  Forbid thyself to feebleness! it mars
  Thy warrior-name! cast off the coward-fit!
  Wake! Be thyself! Arise, Scourge of thy Foes!

  Arjuna.
  How can I, in the battle, shoot with shafts
  On Bhishma, or on Drona-O thou Chief!--
  Both worshipful, both honourable men?

  Better to live on beggar's bread
    With those we love alive,
  Than taste their blood in rich feasts spread,
    And guiltily survive!
  Ah! were it worse-who knows?--to be
    Victor or vanquished here,
  When those confront us angrily
    Whose death leaves living drear?
  In pity lost, by doubtings tossed,
    My thoughts-distracted-turn
  To Thee, the Guide I reverence most,
    That I may counsel learn:
  I know not what would heal the grief
    Burned into soul and sense,
  If I were earth's unchallenged chief--
    A god--and these gone thence!

  Sanjaya.
  So spake Arjuna to the Lord of  Hearts,
  And sighing,"I will not fight!" held silence then.
  To whom, with tender smile, (O Bharata! )
  While the Prince wept despairing 'twixt those hosts,
  Krishna made answer in divinest verse:

  Krishna.
  Thou grievest where no grief should be! thou speak'st
  Words lacking wisdom! for the wise in heart
  Mourn not for those that live, nor those that die.
  Nor I, nor thou, nor any one of these,
  Ever was not, nor ever will not be,
  For ever and for ever afterwards.
  All, that doth live, lives always! To man's frame
  As there come infancy and youth and age,
  So come there raisings-up and layings-down
  Of other and of other life-abodes,
  Which the wise know, and fear not. This that irks--
  Thy sense-life, thrilling to the elements--
  Bringing thee heat and cold, sorrows and joys,
  'Tis brief and mutable! Bear with it, Prince!
  As the wise bear. The soul which is not moved,
  The soul that with a strong and constant calm
  Takes sorrow and takes joy indifferently,
  Lives in the life undying! That which is
  Can never cease to be; that which is not
  Will not exist. To see this truth of both
  Is theirs who part essence from accident,
  Substance from shadow. Indestructible,
  Learn thou! the Life is, spreading life through all;
  It cannot anywhere, by any means,
  Be anywise diminished, stayed, or changed.
  But for these fleeting frames which it informs
  With spirit deathless, endless, infinite,
  They perish. Let them perish, Prince! and fight!
  He who shall say, "Lo! I have slain a man!"
  He who shall think, "Lo! I am slain!" those both
  Know naught! Life cannot slay. Life is not slain!
  Never the spirit was born; the spirit shall cease to be never;
  Never was time it was not; End and Beginning are dreams!
  Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth the spirit for ever;
  Death hath not touched it at all, dead though the house of it seems!

  Who knoweth it exhaustless, self-sustained,
  Immortal, indestructible,--shall such
  Say, "I have killed a man, or caused to kill?"

  Nay, but as when one layeth
    His worn-out robes away,
  And taking new ones, sayeth,
    "These will I wear to-day!"
  So putteth by the spirit
    Lightly its garb of flesh,
  And passeth to inherit
    A residence afresh.

  I say to thee weapons reach not the Life;
  Flame burns it not, waters cannot o'erwhelm,
  Nor dry winds wither it. Impenetrable,
  Unentered, unassailed, unharmed, untouched,
  Immortal, all-arriving, stable, sure,
  Invisible, ineffable, by word
  And thought uncompassed, ever all itself,
  Thus is the Soul declared! How wilt thou, then,--
  Knowing it so,--grieve when thou shouldst not grieve?
  How, if thou hearest that the man new-dead
  Is, like the man new-born, still living man--
  One same, existent Spirit--wilt thou weep?
  The end of birth is death; the end of death
  Is birth: this is ordained! and mournest thou,
  Chief of the stalwart arm! for what befalls
  Which could not otherwise befall? The birth
  Of living things comes unperceived; the death
  Comes unperceived; between them, beings perceive:
  What is there sorrowful herein, dear Prince?

  Wonderful, wistful, to contemplate!
    Difficult, doubtful, to speak upon!
  Strange and great for tongue to relate,
    Mystical hearing for every one!
  Nor wotteth man this, what a marvel it is,
    When seeing, and saying, and hearing are done!

  This Life within all living things, my Prince!
  Hides beyond harm; scorn thou to suffer, then,
  For that which cannot suffer. Do thy part!
  Be mindful of thy name, and tremble not!
  Nought better can betide a martial soul
  Than lawful war; happy the warrior
  To whom comes joy of battle--comes, as now,
  Glorious and fair, unsought; opening for him
  A gateway unto Heav'n. But, if thou shunn'st
  This honourable field--a Kshattriya--
  If, knowing thy duty and thy task, thou bidd'st
  Duty and task go by--that shall be sin!
  And those to come shall speak thee infamy
  From age to age; but infamy is worse
  For men of noble blood to bear than death!
  The chiefs upon their battle-chariots
  Will deem 'twas fear that drove thee from the fray.
  Of those who held thee mighty-souled the scorn
  Thou must abide, while all thine enemies
  Will scatter bitter speech of thee, to mock
  The valour which thou hadst; what fate could fall
  More grievously than this? Either--being killed--
  Thou wilt win Swarga's safety, or--alive
  And victor--thou wilt reign an earthly king.
  Therefore, arise, thou Son of Kunti! brace
  Thine arm for conflict, nerve thy heart to meet--
  As things alike to thee--pleasure or pain,
  Profit or ruin, victory or defeat:
  So minded, gird thee to the fight, for so
  Thou shalt not sin!

  Thus far I speak to thee
  As from the "Sankhya"--unspiritually--
  Hear now the deeper teaching of the Yog,
  Which holding, understanding, thou shalt burst
  Thy Karmabandh, the bondage of wrought deeds.
  Here shall no end be hindered, no hope marred,
  No loss be feared: faith--yea, a little faith--
  Shall save thee from the anguish of thy dread.
  Here, Glory of the Kurus! shines one rule--
  One steadfast rule--while shifting souls have laws
  Many and hard. Specious, but wrongful deem
  The speech of those ill-taught ones who extol
  The letter of their Vedas, saying, "This
  Is all we have, or need;" being weak at heart
  With wants, seekers of Heaven: which comes--they say--
  As "fruit of good deeds done;" promising men
  Much profit in new births for works of faith;
  In various rites abounding; following whereon
  Large merit shall accrue towards wealth and power;
  Albeit, who wealth and power do most desire
  Least fixity of soul have such, least hold
  On heavenly meditation. Much these teach,
  From Veds, concerning the "three qualities;"
  But thou, be free of the "three qualities,"
  Free of the "pairs of opposites,"[FN#2] and free
  From that sad righteousness which calculates;
  Self-ruled, Arjuna! simple, satisfied![FN#3]
  Look! like as when a tank pours water forth
  To suit all needs, so do these Brahmans draw
  Text for all wants from tank of Holy Writ.
  But thou, want not! ask not! Find full reward
  Of doing right in right! Let right deeds be
  Thy motive, not the fruit which comes from them.
  And live in action! Labour! Make thine acts
  Thy piety, casting all self aside,
  Contemning gain and merit; equable
  In good or evil: equability
  Is Yog, is piety!

  Yet, the right act
  Is less, far less, than the right-thinking mind.
  Seek refuge in thy soul; have there thy heaven!
  Scorn them that follow virtue for her gifts!
  The mind of pure devotion--even here--
  Casts equally aside good deeds and bad,
  Passing above them. Unto pure devotion
  Devote thyself: with perfect meditation
  Comes perfect act, and the right-hearted rise--
  More certainly because they seek no gain--
  Forth from the bands of body, step by step,
  To highest seats of bliss. When thy firm soul
  Hath shaken off those tangled oracles
  Which ignorantly guide, then shall it soar
  To high neglect of what's denied or said,
  This way or that way, in doctrinal writ.
  Troubled no longer by the priestly lore,
  Safe shall it live, and sure; steadfastly bent
  On meditation. This is Yog--and Peace!

  Arjuna.
  What is his mark who hath that steadfast heart,
  Confirmed in holy meditation? How
  Know we his speech, Kesava? Sits he, moves he
  Like other men?

  Krishna.
  When one, O Pritha's Son!
  Abandoning desires which shake the mind--
  Finds in his soul full comfort for his soul,
  He hath attained the Yog--that man is such!
  In sorrows not dejected, and in joys
  Not overjoyed; dwelling outside the stress
  Of passion, fear, and anger; fixed in calms
  Of lofty contemplation;--such an one
  Is Muni, is the Sage, the true Recluse!
  He who to none and nowhere overbound
  By ties of flesh, takes evil things and good
  Neither desponding nor exulting, such
  Bears wisdom's plainest mark! He who shall draw
  As the wise tortoise draws its four feet safe
  Under its shield, his five frail senses back
  Under the spirit's buckler from the world
  Which else assails them, such an one, my Prince!
  Hath wisdom's mark! Things that solicit sense
  Hold off from the self-governed; nay, it comes,
  The appetites of him who lives beyond
  Depart,--aroused no more. Yet may it chance,
  O Son of Kunti! that a governed mind
  Shall some time feel the sense-storms sweep, and wrest
  Strong self-control by the roots. Let him regain
  His kingdom! let him conquer this, and sit
  On Me intent. That man alone is wise
  Who keeps the mastery of himself! If one
  Ponders on objects of the sense, there springs
  Attraction; from attraction grows desire,
  Desire flames to fierce passion, passion breeds
  Recklessness; then the memory--all betrayed--
  Lets noble purpose go, and saps the mind,
  Till purpose, mind, and man are all undone.
  But, if one deals with objects of the sense
  Not loving and not hating, making them
  Serve his free soul, which rests serenely lord,
  Lo! such a man comes to tranquillity;
  And out of that tranquillity shall rise
  The end and healing of his earthly pains,
  Since the will governed sets the soul at peace.
  The soul of the ungoverned is not his,
  Nor hath he knowledge of himself; which lacked,
  How grows serenity? and, wanting that,
  Whence shall he hope for happiness?

  The mind
  That gives itself to follow shows of sense
  Seeth its helm of wisdom rent away,
  And, like a ship in waves of whirlwind, drives
  To wreck and death. Only with him, great Prince!
  Whose senses are not swayed by things of sense--
  Only with him who holds his mastery,
  Shows wisdom perfect. What is midnight-gloom
  To unenlightened souls shines wakeful day
  To his clear gaze; what seems as wakeful day
  Is known for night, thick night of ignorance,
  To his true-seeing eyes. Such is the Saint!

  And like the ocean, day by day receiving
      Floods from all lands, which never overflows
  Its boundary-line not leaping, and not leaving,
      Fed by the rivers, but unswelled by those;--

  So is the perfect one! to his soul's ocean
      The world of sense pours streams of witchery;
  They leave him as they find, without commotion,
      Taking their tribute, but remaining sea.

  Yea! whoso, shaking off the yoke of flesh
  Lives lord, not servant, of his lusts; set free
  From pride, from passion, from the sin of "Self,"
  Toucheth tranquillity! O Pritha's Son!
  That is the state of Brahm! There rests no dread
  When that last step is reached! Live where he will,
  Die when he may, such passeth from all 'plaining,
  To blest Nirvana, with the Gods, attaining.

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER II. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Sankhya-Yog,"
  Or "The Book of Doctrines."




  CHAPTER III


  Arjuna.
  Thou whom all mortals praise, Janardana!
  If meditation be a nobler thing
  Than action, wherefore, then, great Kesava!
  Dost thou impel me to this dreadful fight?
  Now am I by thy doubtful speech disturbed!
  Tell me one thing, and tell me certainly;
  By what road shall I find the better end?

  Krishna.
  I told thee, blameless Lord! there be two paths
  Shown to this world; two schools of wisdom.

  First
  The Sankhya's, which doth save in way of works
  Prescribed[FN#4] by reason; next, the Yog, which bids
  Attain by meditation, spiritually:
  Yet these are one! No man shall 'scape from act
  By shunning action; nay, and none shall come
  By mere renouncements unto perfectness.
  Nay, and no jot of time, at any time,
  Rests any actionless; his nature's law
  Compels him, even unwilling, into act;
  [For thought is act in fancy]. He who sits
  Suppressing all the instruments of flesh,
  Yet in his idle heart thinking on them,
  Plays the inept and guilty hypocrite:
  But he who, with strong body serving mind,
  Gives up his mortal powers to worthy work,
  Not seeking gain, Arjuna! such an one
  Is honourable. Do thine allotted task!
  Work is more excellent than idleness;
  The body's life proceeds not, lacking work.
  There is a task of holiness to do,
  Unlike world-binding toil, which bindeth not
  The faithful soul; such earthly duty do
  Free from desire, and thou shalt well perform
  Thy heavenly purpose. Spake Prajapati--
  In the beginning, when all men were made,
  And, with mankind, the sacrifice-- "Do this!
  Work! sacrifice! Increase and multiply
  With sacrifice! This shall be Kamaduk,
  Your 'Cow of Plenty,' giving back her milk
  Of all abundance. Worship the gods thereby;
  The gods shall yield thee grace. Those meats ye crave
  The gods will grant to Labour, when it pays
  Tithes in the altar-flame. But if one eats
  Fruits of the earth, rendering to kindly Heaven
  No gift of toil, that thief steals from his world."

  Who eat of food after their sacrifice
  Are quit of fault, but they that spread a feast
  All for themselves, eat sin and drink of sin.
  By food the living live; food comes of rain,
  And rain comes by the pious sacrifice,
  And sacrifice is paid with tithes of toil;
  Thus action is of Brahma, who is One,
  The Only, All-pervading; at all times
  Present in sacrifice. He that abstains
  To help the rolling wheels of this great world,
  Glutting his idle sense, lives a lost life,
  Shameful and vain. Existing for himself,
  Self-concentrated, serving self alone,
  No part hath he in aught; nothing achieved,
  Nought wrought or unwrought toucheth him; no hope
  Of help for all the living things of earth
  Depends from him.[FN#5] Therefore, thy task prescribed
  With spirit unattached gladly perform,
  Since in performance of plain duty man
  Mounts to his highest bliss. By works alone
  Janak and ancient saints reached blessedness!
  Moreover, for the upholding of thy kind,
  Action thou should'st embrace. What the wise choose
  The unwise people take; what best men do
  The multitude will follow. Look on me,
  Thou Son of Pritha! in the three wide worlds
  I am not bound to any toil, no height
  Awaits to scale, no gift remains to gain,
  Yet I act here! and, if I acted not--
  Earnest and watchful--those that look to me
  For guidance, sinking back to sloth again
  Because I slumbered, would decline from good,
  And I should break earth's order and commit
  Her offspring unto ruin, Bharata!
  Even as the unknowing toil, wedded to sense,
  So let the enlightened toil, sense-freed, but set
  To bring the world deliverance, and its bliss;
  Not sowing in those simple, busy hearts
  Seed of despair. Yea! let each play his part
  In all he finds to do, with unyoked soul.
  All things are everywhere by Nature wrought
  In interaction of the qualities.
  The fool, cheated by self, thinks, "This I did"
  And "That I wrought; "but--ah, thou strong-armed Prince!--
  A better-lessoned mind, knowing the play
  Of visible things within the world of sense,
  And how the qualities must qualify,
  Standeth aloof even from his acts. Th' untaught
  Live mixed with them, knowing not Nature's way,
  Of highest aims unwitting, slow and dull.
  Those make thou not to stumble, having the light;
  But all thy dues discharging, for My sake,
  With meditation centred inwardly,
  Seeking no profit, satisfied, serene,
  Heedless of issue--fight! They who shall keep
  My ordinance thus, the wise and willing hearts,
  Have quittance from all issue of their acts;
  But those who disregard My ordinance,
  Thinking they know, know nought, and fall to loss,
  Confused and foolish. 'Sooth, the instructed one
  Doth of his kind, following what fits him most:
  And lower creatures of their kind; in vain
  Contending 'gainst the law. Needs must it be
  The objects of the sense will stir the sense
  To like and dislike, yet th' enlightened man
  Yields not to these, knowing them enemies.
  Finally, this is better, that one do
  His own task as he may, even though he fail,
  Than take tasks not his own, though they seem good.
  To die performing duty is no ill;
  But who seeks other roads shall wander still.

  Arjuna.
  Yet tell me, Teacher! by what force doth man
  Go to his ill, unwilling; as if one
  Pushed him that evil path?

  Krishna.
  Kama it is!
  Passion it is! born of the Darknesses,
  Which pusheth him. Mighty of appetite,
  Sinful, and strong is this!--man's enemy!
  As smoke blots the white fire, as clinging rust
  Mars the bright mirror, as the womb surrounds
  The babe unborn, so is the world of things
  Foiled, soiled, enclosed in this desire of flesh.
  The wise fall, caught in it; the unresting foe
  It is of wisdom, wearing countless forms,
  Fair but deceitful, subtle as a flame.
  Sense, mind, and reason--these, O Kunti's Son!
  Are booty for it; in its play with these
  It maddens man, beguiling, blinding him.
  Therefore, thou noblest child of Bharata!
  Govern thy heart! Constrain th' entangled sense!
  Resist the false, soft sinfulness which saps
  Knowledge and judgment! Yea, the world is strong,
  But what discerns it stronger, and the mind
  Strongest; and high o'er all the ruling Soul.
  Wherefore, perceiving Him who reigns supreme,
  Put forth full force of Soul in thy own soul!
  Fight! vanquish foes and doubts, dear Hero! slay
  What haunts thee in fond shapes, and would betray!

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER III. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Karma-Yog,"
  Or "The Book of Virtue in Work."




  CHAPTER IV


  Krishna.
  This deathless Yoga, this deep union,
  I taught Vivaswata,[FN#6] the Lord of Light;
  Vivaswata to Manu gave it; he
  To Ikshwaku; so passed it down the line
  Of all my royal Rishis. Then, with years,
  The truth grew dim and perished, noble Prince!
  Now once again to thee it is declared--
  This ancient lore, this mystery supreme--
  Seeing I find thee votary and friend.

  Arjuna.
  Thy birth, dear Lord, was in these later days,
  And bright Vivaswata's preceded time!
  How shall I comprehend this thing thou sayest,
  "From the beginning it was I who taught?"

  Krishna.
  Manifold the renewals of my birth
  Have been, Arjuna! and of thy births, too!
  But mine I know, and thine thou knowest not,
  O Slayer of thy Foes! Albeit I be
  Unborn, undying, indestructible,
  The Lord of all things living; not the less--
  By Maya, by my magic which I stamp
  On floating Nature-forms, the primal vast--
  I come, and go, and come. When Righteousness
  Declines, O Bharata! when Wickedness
  Is strong, I rise, from age to age, and take
  Visible shape, and move a man with men,
  Succouring the good, thrusting the evil back,
  And setting Virtue on her seat again.
  Who knows the truth touching my births on earth
  And my divine work, when he quits the flesh
  Puts on its load no more, falls no more down
  To earthly birth: to Me he comes, dear Prince!
  Many there be who come! from fear set free,
  From anger, from desire; keeping their hearts
  Fixed upon me--my Faithful--purified
  By sacred flame of Knowledge. Such as these
  Mix with my being. Whoso worship me,
  Them I exalt; but all men everywhere
  Shall fall into my path; albeit, those souls
  Which seek reward for works, make sacrifice
  Now, to the lower gods. I say to thee
  Here have they their reward. But I am He
  Made the Four Castes, and portioned them a place
  After their qualities and gifts. Yea, I
  Created, the Reposeful; I that live
  Immortally, made all those mortal births:
  For works soil not my essence, being works
  Wrought uninvolved.[FN#7] Who knows me acting thus
  Unchained by action, action binds not him;
  And, so perceiving, all those saints of old
  Worked, seeking for deliverance. Work thou
  As, in the days gone by, thy fathers did.

  Thou sayst, perplexed, It hath been asked before
  By singers and by sages, "What is act,
  And what inaction? "I will teach thee this,
  And, knowing, thou shalt learn which work doth save
  Needs must one rightly meditate those three--
  Doing,--not doing,--and undoing. Here
  Thorny and dark the path is! He who sees
  How action may be rest, rest action--he
  Is wisest 'mid his kind; he hath the truth!
  He doeth well, acting or resting. Freed
  In all his works from prickings of desire,
  Burned clean in act by the white fire of truth,
  The wise call that man wise; and such an one,
  Renouncing fruit of deeds, always content.
  Always self-satisfying, if he works,
  Doth nothing that shall stain his separate soul,
  Which--quit of fear and hope--subduing self--
  Rejecting outward impulse--yielding up
  To body's need nothing save body, dwells
  Sinless amid all sin, with equal calm
  Taking what may befall, by grief unmoved,
  Unmoved by joy, unenvyingly; the same
  In good and evil fortunes; nowise bound
  By bond of deeds. Nay, but of such an one,
  Whose crave is gone, whose soul is liberate,
  Whose heart is set on truth--of such an one
  What work he does is work of sacrifice,
  Which passeth purely into ash and smoke
  Consumed upon the altar! All's then God!
  The sacrifice is Brahm, the ghee and grain
  Are Brahm, the fire is Brahm, the flesh it eats
  Is Brahm, and unto Brahm attaineth he
  Who, in such office, meditates on Brahm.
  Some votaries there be who serve the gods
  With flesh and altar-smoke; but other some
  Who, lighting subtler fires, make purer rite
  With will of worship. Of the which be they
  Who, in white flame of continence, consume
  Joys of the sense, delights of eye and ear,
  Forgoing tender speech and sound of song:
  And they who, kindling fires with torch of Truth,
  Burn on a hidden altar-stone the bliss
  Of youth and love, renouncing happiness:
  And they who lay for offering there their wealth,
  Their penance, meditation, piety,
  Their steadfast reading of the scrolls, their lore
  Painfully gained with long austerities:
  And they who, making silent sacrifice,
  Draw in their breath to feed the flame of thought,
  And breathe it forth to waft the heart on high,
  Governing the ventage of each entering air
  Lest one sigh pass which helpeth not the soul:
  And they who, day by day denying needs,
  Lay life itself upon the altar-flame,
  Burning the body wan. Lo! all these keep
  The rite of offering, as if they slew
  Victims; and all thereby efface much sin.
  Yea! and who feed on the immortal food
  Left of such sacrifice, to Brahma pass,
  To The Unending. But for him that makes
  No sacrifice, he hath nor part nor lot
  Even in the present world. How should he share
  Another, O thou Glory of thy Line?

  In sight of Brahma all these offerings
  Are spread and are accepted! Comprehend
  That all proceed by act; for knowing this,
  Thou shalt be quit of doubt. The sacrifice
  Which Knowledge pays is better than great gifts
  Offered by wealth, since gifts' worth--O my Prince!
  Lies in the mind which gives, the will that serves:
  And these are gained by reverence, by strong search,
  By humble heed of those who see the Truth
  And teach it. Knowing Truth, thy heart no more
  Will ache with error, for the Truth shall show
  All things subdued to thee, as thou to Me.
  Moreover, Son of Pandu! wert thou worst
  Of all wrong-doers, this fair ship of Truth
  Should bear thee safe and dry across the sea
  Of thy transgressions. As the kindled flame
  Feeds on the fuel till it sinks to ash,
  So unto ash, Arjuna! unto nought
  The flame of Knowledge wastes works' dross away!
  There is no purifier like thereto
  In all this world, and he who seeketh it
  Shall find it--being grown perfect--in himself.
  Believing, he receives it when the soul
  Masters itself, and cleaves to Truth, and comes--
  Possessing knowledge--to the higher peace,
  The uttermost repose. But those untaught,
  And those without full faith, and those who fear
  Are shent; no peace is here or other where,
  No hope, nor happiness for whoso doubts.
  He that, being self-contained, hath vanquished doubt,
  Disparting self from service, soul from works,
  Enlightened and emancipate, my Prince!
  Works fetter him no more! Cut then atwain
  With sword of wisdom, Son of Bharata!
  This doubt that binds thy heart-beats! cleave the bond
  Born of thy ignorance! Be bold and wise!
  Give thyself to the field with me! Arise!

  HERE ENDETH CHAPTER IV. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Jnana Yog,"
  Or "The Book of the Religion of Knowledge,"




  CHAPTER V


  Arjuna.
  Yet, Krishna! at the one time thou dost laud
  Surcease of works, and, at another time,
  Service through work. Of these twain plainly tell
  Which is the better way?

  Krishna.
  To cease from works
  Is well, and to do works in holiness
  Is well; and both conduct to bliss supreme;
  But of these twain the better way is his
  Who working piously refraineth not.

  That is the true Renouncer, firm and fixed,
  Who--seeking nought, rejecting nought--dwells proof
  Against the "opposites."[FN#8] O valiant Prince!
  In doing, such breaks lightly from all deed:
  'Tis the new scholar talks as they were two,
  This Sankhya and this Yoga: wise men know
  Who husbands one plucks golden fruit of both!
  The region of high rest which Sankhyans reach
  Yogins attain. Who sees these twain as one
  Sees with clear eyes! Yet such abstraction, Chief!
  Is hard to win without much holiness.
  Whoso is fixed in holiness, self-ruled,
  Pure-hearted, lord of senses and of self,
  Lost in the common life of all which lives--
  A "Yogayukt"--he is a Saint who wends
  Straightway to Brahm. Such an one is not touched
  By taint of deeds. "Nought of myself I do!"
  Thus will he think-who holds the truth of truths--
  In seeing, hearing, touching, smelling; when
  He eats, or goes, or breathes; slumbers or talks,
  Holds fast or loosens, opes his eyes or shuts;
  Always assured "This is the sense-world plays
  With senses."He that acts in thought of Brahm,
  Detaching end from act, with act content,
  The world of sense can no more stain his soul
  Than waters mar th' enamelled lotus-leaf.
  With life, with heart, with mind,-nay, with the help
  Of all five senses--letting selfhood go--
  Yogins toil ever towards their souls' release.
  Such votaries, renouncing fruit of deeds,
  Gain endless peace: the unvowed, the passion-bound,
  Seeking a fruit from works, are fastened down.
  The embodied sage, withdrawn within his soul,
  At every act sits godlike in "the town
  Which hath nine gateways,"[FN#9] neither doing aught
  Nor causing any deed. This world's Lord makes
  Neither the work, nor passion for the work,
  Nor lust for fruit of work; the man's own self
  Pushes to these! The Master of this World
  Takes on himself the good or evil deeds
  Of no man--dwelling beyond! Mankind errs here
  By folly, darkening knowledge. But, for whom
  That darkness of the soul is chased by light,
  Splendid and clear shines manifest the Truth
  As if a Sun of Wisdom sprang to shed
  Its beams of dawn. Him meditating still,
  Him seeking, with Him blended, stayed on Him,
  The souls illuminated take that road
  Which hath no turning back--their sins flung off
  By strength of faith. [Who will may have this Light;
  Who hath it sees.] To him who wisely sees,
  The Brahman with his scrolls and sanctities,
  The cow, the elephant, the unclean dog,
  The Outcast gorging dog's meat, are all one.

  The world is overcome--aye! even here!
  By such as fix their faith on Unity.
  The sinless Brahma dwells in Unity,
  And they in Brahma. Be not over-glad
  Attaining joy, and be not over-sad
  Encountering grief, but, stayed on Brahma, still
  Constant let each abide! The sage whose soul
  Holds off from outer contacts, in himself
  Finds bliss; to Brahma joined by piety,
  His spirit tastes eternal peace. The joys
  Springing from sense-life are but quickening wombs
  Which breed sure griefs: those joys begin and end!
  The wise mind takes no pleasure, Kunti's Son!
  In such as those! But if a man shall learn,
  Even while he lives and bears his body's chain,
  To master lust and anger, he is blest!
  He is the Yukta; he hath happiness,
  Contentment, light, within: his life is merged
  In Brahma's life; he doth Nirvana touch!
  Thus go the Rishis unto rest, who dwell
  With sins effaced, with doubts at end, with hearts
  Governed and calm. Glad in all good they live,
  Nigh to the peace of God; and all those live
  Who pass their days exempt from greed and wrath,
  Subduing self and senses, knowing the Soul!

  The Saint who shuts outside his placid soul
  All touch of sense, letting no contact through;
  Whose quiet eyes gaze straight from fixed brows,
  Whose outward breath and inward breath are drawn
  Equal and slow through nostrils still and close;
  That one-with organs, heart, and mind constrained,
  Bent on deliverance, having put away
  Passion, and fear, and rage;--hath, even now,
  Obtained deliverance, ever and ever freed.
  Yea! for he knows Me Who am He that heeds
  The sacrifice and worship, God revealed;
  And He who heeds not, being Lord of Worlds,
  Lover of all that lives, God unrevealed,
  Wherein who will shall find surety and shield!

  HERE ENDS CHAPTER V. OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA,
  Entitled "Karmasanyasayog,"
  Or "The Book of Religion by Renouncing Fruit of Works."




  CHAPTER VI


  Krishna.
  Therefore, who doeth work rightful to do,
  Not seeking gain from work, that man, O Prince!
  Is Sanyasi and Yogi--both in one
  And he is neither who lights not the flame
  Of sacrifice, nor setteth hand to task.

  Regard as true Renouncer him that makes
  Worship by work, for who renounceth not
  Works not as Yogin. So is that well said:
  "By works the votary doth rise to faith,
  And saintship is the ceasing from all works;
  Because the perfect Yogin acts--but acts
  Unmoved by passions and unbound by deeds,
  Setting result aside.

  Let each man raise
  The Self by Soul, not trample down his Self,
  Since Soul that is Self's friend may grow Self's foe.
  Soul is Self's friend when Self doth rule o'er Self,
  But Self turns enemy if Soul's own self
  Hates Self as not itself.[FN#10]

  The sovereign soul
  Of him who lives self-governed and at peace
  Is centred in itself, taking alike
  Pleasure and pain; heat, cold; glory and shame.
  He is the Yogi, he is Yukta, glad
  With joy of light and truth; dwelling apart
  Upon a peak, with senses subjugate
  Whereto the clod, the rock, the glistering gold
  Show all as one. By this sign is he known
  Being of equal grace to comrades, friends,
  Chance-comers, strangers, lovers, enemies,
  Aliens and kinsmen; loving all alike,
  Evil or good.

  Sequestered should he sit,
  Steadfastly meditating, solitary,
  His thoughts controlled, his passions laid away,
  Quit of belongings. In a fair, still spot
  Having his fixed abode,--not too much raised,
  Nor yet too low,--let him abide, his goods
  A cloth, a deerskin, and the Kusa-grass.
  There, setting hard his mind upon The One,
  Restraining heart and senses, silent, calm,
  Let him accomplish Yoga, and achieve
  Pureness of soul, holding immovable
  Body and neck and head, his gaze absorbed
  Upon his nose-end,[FN#11] rapt from all around,
  Tranquil in spirit, free of fear, intent
  Upon his Brahmacharya vow, devout,
  Musing on Me, lost in the thought of Me.
  That Yojin, so devoted, so controlled,
  Comes to the peace beyond,--My peace, the peace
  Of high Nirvana!

  But for earthly needs
  Religion is not his who too much fasts
  Or too much feasts, nor his who sleeps away
  An idle mind; nor his who wears to waste
  His strength in vigils. Nay, Arjuna! call
  That the true piety which most removes
  Earth-aches and ills, where one is moderate
  In eating and in resting, and in sport;
  Measured in wish and act; sleeping betimes,
  Waking betimes for duty.

  When the man,
  So living, centres on his soul the thought
  Straitly restrained--untouched internally
  By stress of sense--then is he Yukta. See!
  Steadfast a lamp burns sheltered from the wind;
  Such is the likeness of the Yogi's mind
  Shut from sense-storms and burning bright to Heaven.
  When mind broods placid, soothed with holy wont;
  When Self contemplates self, and in itself
  Hath comfort; when it knows the nameless joy
  Beyond all scope of sense, revealed to soul--
  Only to soul! and, knowing, wavers not,
  True to the farther Truth; when, holding this,
  It deems no other treasure comparable,
  But, harboured there, cannot be stirred or shook
  By any gravest grief, call that state "peace,"
  That happy severance Yoga; call that man
  The perfect Yogin!

  Steadfastly the will
  Must toil thereto, till efforts end in ease,
  And thought has passed from thinking. Shaking off
  All longings bred by dreams of fame and gain,
  Shutting the doorways of the senses close
  With watchful ward; so, step by step, it comes
  To gift of peace assured and heart assuaged,
  When the mind dwells self-wrapped, and the soul broods
  Cumberless. But, as often as the heart
  Breaks--wild and wavering--from control, so oft
  Let him re-curb it, let him rein it back
  To the soul's governance; for perfect bliss
  Grows only in the bosom tranquillised,
  The spirit passionless, purged from offence,
  Vowed to the Infinite. He who thus vows
  His soul to the Supreme Soul, quitting sin,
  Passes unhindered to the endless bliss
  Of unity with Brahma. He so vowed,
  So blended, sees the Life-Soul resident
  In all things living, and all living things
  In that Life-Soul contained. And whoso thus
  Discerneth Me in all, and all in Me,
  I never let him go; nor looseneth he
  Hold upon Me; but, dwell he where he may,
  Whate'er his life, in Me he dwells and lives,
  Because he knows and worships Me, Who dwell
  In all which lives, and cleaves to Me in all.
  Arjuna! if a man sees everywhere--
  Taught by his own similitude--one Life,
  One Essence in the Evil and the Good,
  Hold him a Yogi, yea! well-perfected!

  Arjuna.
  Slayer of Madhu! yet again, this Yog,
  This Peace, derived from equanimity,
  Made known by thee--I see no fixity
  Therein, no rest, because the heart of men
  Is unfixed, Krishna! rash, tumultuous,
  Wilful and strong. It were all one, I think,
  To hold the wayward wind, as tame man's heart.

  Krishna.
  Hero long-armed! beyond denial, hard
  Man's heart is to restrain, and wavering;
  Yet may it grow restrained by habit, Prince!
  By wont of self-command. This Yog, I say,
  Cometh not lightly to th' ungoverned ones;
  But he who will be master of himself
  Shall win it, if he stoutly strive thereto.

  Arjuna.
  And what road goeth he who, having faith,
  Fails, Krishna! in the striving; falling back
  From holiness, missing the perfect rule?
  Is he not lost, straying from Brahma's light,
  Like the vain cloud, which floats 'twixt earth and heaven
  When lightning splits it, and it vanisheth?
  Fain would I hear thee answer me herein,
  Since, Krishna! none save thou can clear the doubt.

  Krishna.
  He is not lost, thou Son of Pritha! No!
  Nor earth, nor heaven is forfeit, even for him,
  Because no heart that holds one right desire
  Treadeth the road of loss! He who should fail,
  Desiring righteousness, cometh at death
  Unto the Region of the Just; dwells there
  Measureless years, and being born anew,
  Beginneth life again in some fair home
  Amid the mild and happy. It may chance
  He doth descend into a Yogin house
  On Virtue's breast; but that is rare! Such birth
  Is hard to be obtained on this earth, Chief!
  So hath he back again what heights of heart
  He did achieve, and so he strives anew
  To perfectness, with better hope, dear Prince!
  For by the old desire he is drawn on
  Unwittingly; and only to desire
  The purity of Yog is to pass
  Beyond the Sabdabrahm, the spoken Ved.
  But, being Yogi, striving strong and long,
  Purged from transgressions, perfected by births