# Raja Yoga
Author: Swami Vivekananda
Category: 08_espiritualidad
Source: Gutenberg #2086
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:23:24.114703
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

THE SLOWCOACH


BY

E. V. LUCAS.




CONTENTS

   CHAPTER 1: THE AVORIES
   CHAPTER 2: THE SOUND OF MYSTERIOUS WHEELS
   CHAPTER 3: THE THOROUGH EXAMINATION
   CHAPTER 4: THE ITEMS
   CHAPTER 5: DIOGENES AND MOSES
   CHAPTER 6: THE PLANS
   CHAPTER 7: MR. LENOX'S YOUNG BROTHER
   CHAPTER 8: THE FIRST DAY
   CHAPTER 9: THE FIRST NIGHT
  CHAPTER 10: THE ADVENTURE OF THE SECOND CARAVAN
  CHAPTER 11: THE WAYSIDE FRIEND
  CHAPTER 12: STRATFORD-ON-AVON
  CHAPTER 13: THE ADVENTURE OF THE YOUNG POLICEMAN
  CHAPTER 14: THE ADVENTURE OF THE LITTLE OLD LADY
  CHAPTER 15: THE ADVENTURE OF THE RUNAWAY PONIES
  CHAPTER 16: THE BLACK SPANIELS
  CHAPTER 17: THE ADVENTURE OF THE LOST BABY
  CHAPTER 18: THE ADVENTURE OF THE OLD IRISHWOMAN
  CHAPTER 19: THE LETTER TO X
  CHAPTER 20: THE ADVENTURE OF THE LINE OF POETRY
  CHAPTER 21: COLLINS'S PEOPLE
  CHAPTER 22: THE ADVENTURE OF THE GIANT
  CHAPTER 23: THE MOST SURPRISING ADVENTURE OF ALL
  CHAPTER 24: THE END



CHAPTER 1

THE AVORIES

Once upon a time there was a nice family. Its name was Avory, and it
lived in an old house in Chiswick, where the Thames is so sad on grey
days and so gay on sunny ones.

Mr.--or rather Captain--Avory was dead; he had been wounded at Spion
Kop, and died a few years after. Mrs. Avory was thirty-five, and she
had four children. The eldest was Janet, aged fourteen, and the
youngest was Gregory Bruce, aged seven. Between these came Robert
Oliver, who was thirteen, and Hester, who was nine.

They were all very fond of each other, and they rarely quarreled. (If
they had done so, I should not be telling this story. You don't catch
me writing books about people who quarrel.) They adored their mother.

The name of the Avories' house was "The Gables," which was a better
name than many houses have, because there actually were gables in its
roof. Hester, who had funny ideas, wanted to see all the people who
lived in all the houses that are called "The Gables" everywhere drawn
up in a row so that she might examine them. She used to lie awake at
night and wonder how many there would be. "I'm sure mother would be the
most beautiful, anyway," she used to say.

History was Hester's passion. She could read history all day. Here she
differed from Robert Oliver, who was all for geography. Their friends
knew of these tastes, of course, and so Hester's presents were nearly
always history books or portraits of great men, such as Napoleon and
Shakespeare, both of whom she almost worshipped, while Robert's were
compasses and maps. He also had a mapmeasurer (from Mr. Lenox), and at
the moment at which this story opens, his birthday being just over, he
was the possessor of a pedometer, which he carried fastened to his leg,
under his knickerbockers, so that it was certain to register every time
he took a step. He kept a careful record of the distance he had walked
since his birthday, and could tell you at any time what it was, if you
gave him a minute or two to crawl under the table and undo his clothes.
He could be heard grunting in dark places all day long, having been
forbidden by Janet to undress in public.

Robert's birthday was on June 20, Hester's on November 8, and Janet's
on February 28. She had the narrowest escape, you see, of getting
birthdays only once in every four years; which is one of the worst
things that can happen to a human being. Gregory Bruce was a little
less lucky, for his birthday was on December 20, which is so near to
Christmas Day that mean persons have been known to make one gift do for
both events. None the less, Gregory's possessions were very numerous;
for he had many friends, and most of them were careful to keep these
two great anniversaries apart.

Gregory's particular passion just now was the names of engines, of
which he had one of the finest collections in Europe; but a model
aeroplane which Mr. Scott had given him was beginning to turn his
thoughts towards the conquest of the air, and whereas he used to tell
people that he meant to be an engine driver when he grew up, he was now
adding, "or a man like Wilbur Wright."

Most children have wanted to fly ever since "Peter Pan" began, and, as
I dare say you have heard, some have tried from the nursery window,
with perfectly awful results, having neglected to have their shoulders
first touched magically; but Gregory Bruce Avory wanted to fly in a
more regular and scientific manner. He wanted to fly like an engineer.
To his mind, indeed, the flying part of "Peter Pan" was the least
fascinating; he preferred the underground home, and the fight with the
Indians, and the mechanism of the crocodile. For a short time, in fact,
his only ambition had been to be the crocodile's front half.

Janet, on the other hand, liked Nana and the pathetic motherly parts
the best; Robert's favourite was Smee, and often at meal times he used
to say, "Woe is me, I have no knife"; while Hester was happiest in the
lagoon scene. This difference of taste in one small family shows how
important it is for anyone who writes a play to put a lot of variety
into it.

Janet, the eldest, was also the most practical. She was, in fact,
towards the others almost more of a younger mother than an elder
sister. Not that Mrs. Avory neglected them at all; but Janet relieved
her of many little duties. She always knew when their feet were likely
to be wet, and Robert had once said that she had "stocking changing on
the brain." She could cook, too, especially cakes, and the tradesmen
had a great respect for her judgment when she went shopping. She knew
when a joint would be too fat, and you should see her pointing out the
bone!

Janet was a tall girl, and very active, and, in spite of her
responsibilities, very jolly. She played hockey as well almost as a
boy, which is, of course, saying everything, and her cricket was good,
too. Her bowling was fast and straight, and usually too much for
Robert, who knew, however, the initials of all the gentlemen and the
Christian names and birthplaces of most of the professionals. Gregory
could not bear cricket, except when it was his own innings, which he
seemed to enjoy during its brief duration. Hester thought it dull
throughout, so that Janet had to depend upon Robert and the Rotherams
for the best games.

Janet had very straight fair hair, and just enough freckles to be
pretty. She looked nicest in blue. Hester, on the contrary, was a dark
little thing, whose best frock was always red.

As for the boys--it doesn't matter what boys are like; but Gregory, I
might say, usually had black hands: not because he was naturally a
grubby little beast, but because engineers do. Robert, on the contrary,
was disposed to be dressy, and he declined to allow his mother or Janet
to buy his socks or neckties without first consulting him as to colours.

Among the friends of the family must be put first Uncle Chris, who was
Captain Avory's brother and a lawyer in Golden Square. Uncle Chris
looked after Mrs. Avory's money and gave advice. He was very nice, and
came to dinner every Sunday (hot roast beef and horse radish sauce).
There was an Aunt Chris, too, but she was an invalid and could not
leave her room, where she lay all the time and remembered birthdays.

Next to Uncle Chris came Mr. Scott, who was a famous author and a very
good cricketer on the lawn, and Mr. Lenox, who was private secretary to
a real lord, and therefore had lots of time and money. Both Mr. Scott
and Mr. Lenox were bachelors, as the best friends of families always
are; unless, of course, their wives are invalids.

Gregory, who was more social than Robert, also knew one policeman, one
coachman, three chauffeurs, and several Chiswick boatmen extremely
intimately. Robert's principal friend outside the family was a bird
stuffer in Hammersmith; but he does not come into this story.

The Avories did not go to boarding school, or, indeed, to any school in
the ordinary way at all; Mrs. Avory said she could not spare them.
Instead they were visited every day except Saturdays by Mr. Crawley and
Miss Bingham, who taught them the things that one is supposed to
know--Mr. Crawley taking the boys in the old billiard room, and Miss
Bingham the girls in the morning room. At some of the lessons--such as
history--they all joined. The classes were attended also by the
Rotherams, the doctor's children, who lived at "Fir Grove," and Horace
Campbell, the only son of the vicar. So it was a kind of school, after
all.

Horace Campbell had always intended to be a cowboy when he grew up, but
a visit to a play called "Raffles" was now rather inclining him to
gentlemanly burglary. William Rotheram, like Gregory, leaned towards
flying; but Jack Rotheram voted steadily for the sea, and talked of
little but Osborne.

Mary Rotheram played with a bat almost as straight as "Plum" Warner's,
and she knew most of the old Somersetshire songs--"Mowing the Barley,"
and "Lord Rendal," and "Seventeen come Sunday"--by heart, and sang them
beautifully. Gregory, who used to revel in Sankey's hymns as sung by
Eliza Pollard, the parlourmaid, now thought that the Somerset music was
the only real kind. Mary Rotheram had a snub nose and quantities of
freckle and a very nice nature.

"The Gables" had a large garden, with a shrubbery of evergreens in it
and a cedar. It was not at all a garden-party garden, because there was
a well-worn cricketpitch right in the middle of the lawn, and Gregory
had a railway system where the best flowers ought to be; but it was a
garden full of fun, and old Kink, the gardener, managed to get a great
many vegetables out of it, too, although not so many as Collins thought
he ought to.

Collins was the cook, a fat, smiling, hot lady of about fifty, who had
been with Mrs. Avory ever since she married. Collins understood
children thoroughly, and made cakes that were rather wet underneath.
Her Yorkshire pudding (for Sunday's dinner) was famous, and her horse
radish sauce was so perfect that it brought tears to the eyes.

Collins collected picture postcards and adored the family. She had
never been cross to any of them, but her way with the butcher's boy and
the grocer's boy and the fishmonger's boy was terrible.

She snapped their heads off (so to speak) every morning, and old Kink
spent quite a lot of his time in rubbing from off the backdoor the
awful things they wrote about her in chalk.

The parlourmaid was Eliza Pollard, who had red hair and a kind heart,
but was continually falling out with her last young man and getting
another. She told Hester all about it. Hester had a special knack of
being told about the servants' young men, for she knew also all about
those of Eliza Pollard's predecessors.

The housemaid was Jane Masters, who helped Eliza Pollard to make the
beds. Jane Masters did not hold with fickleness in love--in fact, she
couldn't abide it--and therefore she was steadily true to a young man
called 'Erb, who looked after the lift at the Stores, and was a
particular friend of Gregory's in consequence. No man who had charge of
a lift could fail to be admired by Gregory.

Finally--and very likely she ought to have come first--was Runcie, or
Mrs. Runciman, who had not only been the nurse of all the Avories, but
of Mrs. Avory before them, when Mrs. Avory was a slip of a girl named
Janet Easton. Runcie was then quite young herself, and why she was
suddenly called Mrs. no one ever quite knew, for she had never married.
And now she was getting on for sixty, and had not much to do except
sympathize with the Avories and reprove the servants. She had a nice
sitting room of her own, where she sat comfortably every afternoon when
such work as she did was done, and received visits from her pets, as
she called the children (none of whom, however, was quite so dear to
her as their mother), and listened to their adventures.

On those evenings on which he came to "The Gables" Mr. Lenox always
looked in on her for a little gossip; and this was called his "runcible
spoon"--the joke being that Mr. Lenox and Runcie were engaged to be
married.

And now you know the Avory family root and branch.



CHAPTER 2

THE SOUND OF MYSTERIOUS WHEELS

One day in late June the Avories and the Rotherams and Horace Campbell
were sitting at tea under the cedar talking about a great tragedy that
had befallen. For Mrs. Avory had just heard that Mrs. Dudeney--their
regular landlady at Sea View, in the Isle of Wight, where they had
lodgings every summer for years and years, and where they were all
ready to go next month as usual--Mrs. Avory had just heard that Mrs.
Dudeney had been taken very ill, and no other rooms were to be had.

Here was a blow! For the Rotherams always went to Sea View too, and had
a tent on the little strip of beach under the wood adjoining the
Avories', and they did everything together. And now it was very likely
that the Avories would not get lodgings at all, and certainly would not
get any half so good as Mrs. Dudeney's, where their ways were known,
and their bathing dresses were always dried at once in case they wanted
to go in again, and so on.

They were all discussing this together, and saying what a shame it was,
when suddenly the unfamiliar sound of the opening of the old stableyard
gates was heard, and then heavy wheels scrunched in and men's voices
called out directions, such as, "Steady, Joe!" "A little bit to the
near side, Bill!" and so forth.

Now, since the stable yard had not been used for years, it was no
wonder that the whole party was, so to speak, on tiptoe, longing to run
and investigate. But Mrs. Avory had always objected very strongly to
inquisitiveness, and so they stayed where they were and waited
expectantly. And then, after a minute or so, Kink came up to the table
with a twinkle in his old eye and a letter in his old hand.

"Didn't we hear the sound of a carriage?" Mrs. Avory asked.

"Did you, mum?" said old Kink, who was a great tease.

"I'm sure there were wheels," said Mrs. Avory.

Kink said nothing.

"Of course there were wheels," said Robert. "Don't be such an old
humbug."

But Kink only twinkled.

"It's only coals," said Gregory; "isn't it?"

"The first I've heard of coals`" said Kink.

"Kinky dear," said Janet, "is it something awfully exciting?"

"Nothing very exciting about a house, that I know of, Miss Janet," said
Kink.

"A house!" cried Janet. "It couldn't have been a house!"

"There's all sorts of houses," said Kink; "there's houses on the ground
and there's houses on--"

"O Kinky," cried Hester, "I know!"

And she clapped her hands and absolutely screamed. "I know. It's a
caravan!"

"A caravan!" the children shouted together, and with one movement they
dashed off to see.

Old Kink laughed and Mrs. Avory laughed.

"It's a caravan right enough," he said. "And a very pretty one too, and
none of they nasty gypsies in it neither."

"But where does it come from?" Mrs. Avory asked, and in reply Kink
handed her the letter; but she had done no more than open it when Janet
ran back to drag her to see the wonderful sight.

Gregory, I need hardly say, was already on the box with the whip in his
hand, while all the others were inside, except Horace Campbell, who had
climbed on the roof, and was telephoning down the chimney. The men and
horse that had brought it were gone.

"Oh, mother," cried Hester, "whose is it? Is it ours?"

"I expect the letter tells us everything," said Mrs. Avory, and,
sitting on the top of the steps, she unfolded the letter, and, after
looking through, read it aloud.

This is what it said:

DEAR CHILDREN,

"It has long been my wish to give you a new kind of present, but I have
hitherto had no luck. I thought once of an elephant, and even wrote to
Jamrach about the idea--a small elephant, not a mountain---but I gave
that up. Chiswick is too crowded, and your garden is too small. But now
I think I have found the very thing. A caravan. It belonged to a lady
artist, who, having to live abroad, wished to sell it; and it is now
yours. I tell you this so that mother need not be afraid that it is
dirty. It should reach you this week, and can stand in the old coach
house until you are ready to set forth on the discovery of your native
land. I should have liked also to have added a horse and a man; but you
must do that and keep an account of what everything costs, and let me
know when I come back from abroad. I shall expect some day a long
account of your adventures, and if you keep a logbook, so much the
better.

"I am,
  "Your true, if unsettling, friend,
    "X.

"P.S.--You will find a use for the enclosed key sooner or later, and if
you want to write to me, address the letter to 'X., care of Smithurst
and Wynn, Lincoln's Inn Fields, W.C.'"


For a while after the letter was finished the Avories were too excited
and thoughtful to speak, while as for the Rotherams and Horace
Campbell, however they may have tried, they could not disguise an
expression, if not exactly of envy, certainly of disappointment. There
was no X. in their family.

"May we really go away in it and discover England?" Robert asked.

"I suppose so," said Mrs. Avory.

"Then that makes Sea View all right," said Gregory. "Because this will
do instead."

The poor Rotherams! Sea View had suddenly become tame and almost
tiresome.

Mrs. Avory saw their regrets in their faces, and cheered them up by the
remark that the caravan must sometimes be lent to others.

"Oh, yes," said Janet.

"Do you think Dr. Rotheram would let you go?" she asked Mary.

"Of course he would," said Jack. "But I wish it was a houseboat."

The suggestion was so idiotic that everyone fell on him in scorn.

"But who is X.?" Mrs. Avory asked.

The letter was written in a round office hand that told nothing. Mr.
Scott was the most likely person, but why should Mr. Scott hide? He
never had done such a thing. Or Mr. Lenox? But neither was it his way
to be secret and mysterious. Nor was it Uncle Christopher's.

When, however, you have a caravan given you, and it is standing there
waiting to be explored, the question who gave it or did not give it
becomes unimportant.

Gregory put the case in a nutshell. "Never mind about old X. now," he
said. "Let's make a thorough examination!"



CHAPTER 3

THE THOROUGH EXAMINATION

It was a real caravan. That is to say, either gypsies might have lived
in it, or anyone that did live in it would soon be properly gipsified.
It was painted in gay colours, and had little white blinds with very
neat waists and red sashes round them. That is the right kind of
caravan. The brown caravans highly varnished are wrong: they may be
more luxurious, but no gypsy would look at them.

The body of it was green--a good apple green--and the panels were lined
with blue. Some people say that blue and green won't go together; but
don't let us take any notice of them. Just look at the bed of
forget-me-nots, or a copse of bluebells; or, for that matter, try to
see the Avories' caravan. The window frames and bars were white. The
spokes and hubs of the wheels were red. It was most awfully gay.

Inside--but the inside of a caravan is so exciting that I hardly know
how to hold my pen. The inside of a caravan! Can you imagine a better
phrase than that? I can't. If Coleridge's statement is true that poetry
is the best words in the best order, then that is the best poem: the
inside of a caravan!

The caravan was sixteen feet six inches long and six feet two inches
high inside. From the ground it stood ten feet. It was six feet four
inches wide. If you measure these distances in the dining room, you
will see how big it was, and you will be able to imagine yourselves in
it.

The woodwork was all highly varnished, and very new and clean. More
than halfway down the caravan were heavy curtains hanging across it,
and behind these was the bedroom, containing four beds, two on each
wall, on hinged shelves, that could be let down flat against the
wall-by day, when the folding chairs could be unfolded, and the bedroom
then became a little boudoir.

The floor space was, however, filled this afternoon with great bundles
which turned out to be gypsy tents and sleeping sacks. "For the boys
and Kink to sleep in," said Janet; "but we must be very careful about
waterproof sheeting on the ground first."

The rest of the caravan, between the door and the bedroom--about ten
feet--was the kitchen and living room. Here every inch of the wall was
used, either by chairs that folded back like those in the corridors of
railway carriages, or by shelves, racks, cupboards, or pegs. There were
two tables, which also folded to the wall.

The stove was close to the door, but of course, no one who lives in a
caravan ever uses the stove except when it is raining. You make the
fire out of doors at all other times, and swing the pot from three
sticks. (Hedgehog stew! Can't you smell it?) There were kitchen
utensils on hooks and racks on each side of the stove which was covered
in with shining brass, and rows of enameled cups and saucers, and
plates, and knives and forks. The living room floor was covered with
linoleum; the bedroom floor had a carpet. Swinging candlesticks were
screwed into the wall here and there. It was more like the cabin of a
ship than anything on land could ever be, and Jack Rotheram began to
weaken towards it.

In course of time other things were discovered, showing what a thorough
person X. was. A large India rubber bath, for instance, and a bath
sheet to go under it. A Beatrice oil stove and oil. An electric torch
for sudden requirements at night. A tea-basket for picnics. Quantities
of cart-oil. A piece of pumice stone (very thoughtful). There was also
a box of little India rubber pads with tintacks, the use for which (not
discovered till later) was to prevent the rattling of the furniture by
making it fit a little better. And in one of the cupboards was a bottle
of camphor pills, and a tin of tobacco labeled "For Tramps and Gypsies."

There was even a bookshelf with books on it: "Hans Andersen," "The
Arabian Nights," "Lavengro," "Inquire Within," "Mrs. Beeton,"
"Bradshaw" (rather cowardly, Robert thought), and "The Blue Poetry
Book." There was also "The Whole Art of Caravaning," with certain
passages marked in pencil, such as this:

"We pull up to measure the breadth of the gate, and if it be broad
enough, send forward an ambassador to the farm, who shall explain that
we would fain camp here, that we are not gypsies, vagabonds or
suspicious characters, that we will leave all as we find it, and will
not rob or wantonly destroy. And in case of need, he shall delicately
hint that we may incidentally provide good custom in butter, eggs,
milk, and half a dozen other things. Our ambassador must also, if it be
possible, secure a stall for the horse."

And this useful reminder:

"We must have water near at hand and a farm within reasonable distance,
and we should look for shelter from prevailing winds. We must avoid
soft ground, and it is a mistake to camp in long grass unless the
weather be particularly dry. We should be as far as possible from the
road if there is much traffic upon it. It is great advantage if there
is a stream or lake at hand for bathing. An old pasture field sloping
away from the road will often satisfy our requirements in low-lying
districts. And up among the moors we shall be content to take a piece
of level ground where we can find it. There will be nothing to disturb
us there."

And this excellent caravan poem:

  "I love the gentle office of the cook,
  The cheerful stove, the placid twilight hour,
  When, with the tender fragrance of the flower,
  And all the bubbling voices of the brook,

  "The coy potato or the onion browns,
  The tender steak takes on a nobler hue.
  I ponder 'mid the falling of the dew,
  And watch the lapwings circling o'er the downs.

  "Like portals at the pathway of the moon
  Two trees stand forth in pencilled silhouette
  Against the steel-grey sky, as black as jet--
  The steak is ready. Ah! too soon! too soon!"

So much (with one exception) for the inside of the caravan. Underneath
it were still other things, for a box with perforated sides swung
between the wheels, and this was the larder, always cool and shady
(except, as Janet remarked, on dusty days), and near it on hooks were a
hanging saucepan, a great kettle, two pails, and two market baskets, a
nose bag, and a skid. Close by was a place for oats and chaff.

A new set of harness was packed on the box, and it was so complete that
on each of the little brass ornaments that hang on the horse's chest
was the letter "A." On the back of the caravan was a shelf that might
be let down, making a kind of sideboard for outdoor meals.

For two or three days the caravan did nothing but hold receptions.
Everyone who knew the Avories came to see it--even Robert's bird
stuffer, who said he would like to borrow it for a week's holiday in
Epping Forest, and observe Nature through its windows. Several of
Gregory's intimates also examined it, and approved. Miss Bingham
pronounced it elegant and commodious, and Mr. Crawley (who, like all
schoolmasters and tutors, made too many puns) said that its probable
rate of speed reminded him of his name. Collins wished she might never
have to cook in it, but otherwise was very tolerant. Eliza Pollard said
that her choice would be a motor car, and Jane Masters brought 'Erb
back on Sunday afternoon, and they examined it together and decided
that with such a home as that they might be married at once.

I have left till the last the most exciting thing of all. In an
enclosure, you remember, was a key concerning the purpose of which
nothing was said in the letter. Well, in the course of the exploration
of the caravan, which went on for some days, always yielding a fresh
discovery, Robert came upon a box securely fastened to the floor in a
dark corner.

"Mother! mother!" he cried; "where's that key? I've found a mysterious
keyhole!"

They all hurried to the stable yard to see, and Robert swiftly inserted
the key, and turned it. He fell back, too much overcome to speak. The
box contained twenty-five new sovereigns.



CHAPTER 4

THE ITEMS

Mr. Lenox either knew everything, or knew someone who knew everything,
so that he was always certain to be able to help in any difficulty.
Mrs. Avory wrote to him to come round and consult with her about it,
and he was there at tea time.

"A caravan!" he said, after she had finished. "Ripping! Nothing better."

"Yes," said Mrs. Avory, "but--"

"Oh, well," said Mr. Lenox, "that's all right. A few little bothers,
but soon over." He checked them off on his finger. "Item---as your old
Swan of Avon, Hester, would say--item, a driver."

"I was thinking of Kink," said Mrs. Avory; "but there's the garden."

"Yes," said Mr. Lenox, "and there's also Kink. Do you think he'd go?"

"The best thing to do is to ask him," said Mrs. Avory. "Gregory, just
run and bring Kink in."

Kink soon appeared, fresh from the soil.

"Would you be willing to drive the caravan if we decided to use it?"
Mrs. Avory asked.

"'If'!" cried the children. "Steady on, mother. 'If'!"

Kink, who was a great tease, pretended to think for quite a long time,
until his silence had driven the children nearly desperate. "Yes," he
then said, "I should, mum, provided you let me find a trustworthy man
to go on with the garden. Otherwise I shouldn't dare to face Mrs.
Collins when I came back."

"That's very kind of you, Kink," said Mrs. Avory.

"Good old Kinky!" said Gregory.

"Yes," said Mr. Lenox. "And now for item two. The horse. How would you
go to work to get a horse, Kink?"

"Well," said Kink, "that's a little out of my way. A horse radish, yes;
but not a horse."

Everyone laughed: the old man expected it.

"Then," said Mr. Lenox, with a mock sigh, "I suppose the horse will
have to be found by me. We don't want to buy one--only to hire it."

"Don't let's have a horse," said Gregory; "let's have a motor. I think
a motor caravan would be splendid."

"There you're quite wrong," said Mr. Lenox. "The life-blood of a
caravan is sloth; the life-blood of a motor is speed. You can't mix
them. And how could Robert here survey England creditably if he rushed
through it in a motor? You're going to survey England, aren't you,
Bobbie? No, it must be a horse, and I will get it. I will make friends
with cabmen, and coachmen, and grooms, and stable-boys. I will carry a
straw in my mouth. I will get a horse to do you credit. What colour
would you like?"

"White," said Janet.

"It shall be a white horse," said Mr. Lenox. "And now," he added, "the
way is cleared for item three. Can you guess what that is?"

They all tried to guess, but could not. They were too excited.

"A dog," said Mr. Lenox.

"Oh, yes," they cried.

"To guard the caravan at night and when we are away," said Janet.

"Exactly," said Mr. Lenox. "And what kind of a dog?"

"A dachshund," said Hester.

"Too small," said Mr. Lenox.

"A St. Bernard," said Robert.

"Too mild," said Mr. Lenox.

"A spaniel," said Janet.

"Too gentle," said Mr. Lenox.

"A fox-terrier," said Gregory.

"Not strong enough," said Mr. Lenox. "I leave it to Mr. Lenox," said
Mrs. Avory.

"Very well, then," said Mr. Lenox, "a retriever--a retriever, because
it is big and formidable, and also because, when tied up, it will
always be on the watch. We'll buy the _Exchange_ and _Mart_, and look
up retrievers. We can't hire a dog; we must buy outright there. Now,
then, Bobbie, item four?"

"Maps," said Bobbie.

"Right," said Mr. Lenox. "I wish I was coming with you."

"Do," they all cried.

"I can't," said Mr. Lenox. "If I were to go away before September, I
should get the sack, and then I should starve. His Lordship is
sufficiently cross with me now, because I had to give him out
leg-before at the annual estate match last Saturday, when I was
umpiring. He couldn't stand anything else."

That night Mrs. Avory, Uncle Christopher, Mr. Scott, and Mr. Lenox were
talking after dinner.

"It's a very wonderful present," said Mrs. Avory; "but there are two
things about it that are not quite satisfactory. One is that one likes
to know where such gifts come from, and the other is that for a party
of children to go away alone, with only Kink, is a great
responsibility." (That's a word which mothers are very fond of.)
"Suppose they're ill?"

"It's a risk you must take," said Uncle Chris. "Don't anticipate
trouble."

"Because," Mrs. Avory went on, "I should not go with them, although I
might arrange to meet them here and there on their journey. They would
like me to be with them, I know, and they would like to be without me,
I know."

"I shouldn't worry about the giver of the present," said Mr. Scott.
"You have many friends from whom you would have no objection to accept
a caravan, and there's no harm in one of those friends wishing to be
anonymous. As for the other matter, I don't see much risk so long as
Kink goes too. He's a careful and very capable old sport, and Janet's
as good a mother as you any day."

Mrs. Avory laughed. "Yes, I know that," she said. "But what about
gypsies and tramps?"

"One has always got to take a few chances," said Uncle Christopher.
"They may get things stolen now and then from the outside of the
caravan, but I should doubt if anything else happened. Kink and a good
dog would see to that. And Janet would see to the children keeping dry,
or getting dry quickly after rain, and so forth. Such an experience as
a fortnight in a caravan of their own should be a splendid thing for
all of them. Gregory, for example--it's quite time that he studied the
A B C of engineering and began where James Watt began, instead of
merely profiting by the efforts of all the investigators since then. I
mean, it's quite time he watched a kettle boil; and Hester would get no
harm by mixing a little washing-up with her 'Romeo and Juliet'
wool-gathering."

"I think you're right," said Mrs. Avory; "and I'm sure they are very
unlikely to get any such experience here. But I shall be very nervous."

"No, you won't," said Mr. Lenox, "because we'll arrange that you shall
have news. I have thought of that. A telegram every morning at
breakfast and a telegram every evening after tea. That will be
perfectly simple. And letters, of course."

In this way it was settled that the Great Experiment might be tried,
especially as so wise a woman as Collins and so old an ally as Runcie
were not against it. Both, indeed, were of Uncle Christopher's opinion
that the self-help and self-reliance which the caravan would lead to
would be of the greatest use.

Collins, when she heard later some hint of the possible route the
caravan would follow, became not only a supporter of the scheme, but an
enthusiast, because her own home was not distant, and she made the
children promise to spend a day there with her brother, the farmer. She
also gave Janet some lessons in frying-pan cooking.

Runcie never became an enthusiast, but she allowed herself to be
interested, if cautionary.

"To think of the nice comfortable beds you will be leaving," she would
say.

"A horse is a vain thing for safety," she would say.

"The blisters you'll get on your poor feet!" she would say.

"The indigestion!" she would say.

"Living like gypsies," she would say.

"No proper washing or anything," she would say.

"Cheer up, Runcie," Gregory would reply; "you're not going."

"And glad I am I'm not," she would answer.

"I wish you were, Runcie, and then we'd show you in the villages as
'The Old-Woman-Who-Can't-See-Any-Fun-in-Caravaning' Walk up! Walk up! A
penny a peep!"

"A clever dog. He knows the difference between an attack and a feeling
of faintness. But just come down to the Bricklayers' Arms, and I'll
show you."

"No, thank you," said Mr. Lenox hastily. "How much is he?"

"Three pounds," said Mr. Amos.

"Oh, come!" said Mr. Lenox. "Not for a public-house dog."

"Not a penny less," said Mr. Amos.



CHAPTER 5

DIOGENES AND MOSES

The Sea View disappointment being so keenly felt, Mrs. Avory decided to
give the children an extra holiday of a fortnight at once, in which to
taste the delights of the caravan, and meanwhile she would herself go
down to the Isle of Wight to try to find other rooms; and it was
arranged that Mary Rotheram and one of her brothers and Horace Campbell
should be squeezed into the party too. Jack and William Rotheram
therefore tossed up for it, and Jack won.

This suddenness, as we shall see, was very fortunate, but it threw Mr.
Lenox into a state of perspiration quite strange to him.

"My dear Jenny," he said to Mrs. Avory, "how am I to get a horse to do
you credit, if you hurry me so? A horse is an animal requiring the most
careful study. Each one of its four legs needs separate consideration.
I should have liked some weeks of thought. The dog, too. Just as there
is only one satisfactory horse in the world for each family, so is
there only one satisfactory dog; and you ask me to get both in a few
minutes."

He lay back and fanned himself.

Then he pulled two pennies from his pocket and gave them to Gregory,
and told him to go to the station bookstall and bring back the
_Exchange_ and _Mart._

The _Exchange_ and _Mart,_ as perhaps you may not know, is, without any
exaggeration, the most delightful paper in the world. It contains
nothing that one dislikes to read about, such as accidents, murders,
suicides, politics, and criticisms of concerts; it contains nothing
whatever of such things, while, on the other hand, it is packed with
matters of real interest. It tells you who has dogs for sale, and
rabbits for sale, and magic-lanterns for sale, and cameras for sale,
and bicycles for sale, and guinea-pigs for sale,--all at a
bargain,--and it tells you also who wants to buy rabbits and cameras
and guinea-pigs; and it also tells you who wants to exchange rabbits
for a gun, or a dog for a fishing-rod, or a gramophone for a parrot.

Gregory brought the paper back, and Mr. Lenox at once turned to the
section entitled "The Kennel," and then to the subsection "Retrievers,"
and he found the names of three persons who wished to sell wonderful
specimens of that breed.

Two were in London and one was at Harrow.

Gregory therefore went off to find a taxicab (no easy thing at
Chiswick), and, coming back with one at last, Mr. Lenox and he drove to
the nearest of the London addresses.

The first was no good at all. The retrievers were all puppies, so
gentle and playful that they would not have frightened even a mouse
from the caravan door. But the next, which was at Bermondsey, was
better. Here, in a small backyard, they found Mr. Amos, the advertiser,
surrounded by kennels. He was a little man with a squint, and he
declared that he had nothing but the best-bred dogs with the longest
pedigrees.

"But we don't want anything so swagger as that," said Mr. Lenox.

"We want a watchdog to be kept on a chain, but friendly enough with his
own people. If you keep only pedigree dogs, we may as well get on to
our next address."

Mr. Amos stepped between Mr. Lenox and the door. "It's most
extraordinary odd," he said, "for, although I make it almost a religion
never to have any but pedigree dogs, it happens that just at this very
moment I have got, for the first time in my whole career, an inferior
animal. It's not mine. Oh, no; I'm only taking care of it for a friend.
But it's a retriever all right, and a good one, mark you, though not a
pedigree dog. My friend wants a good home for it. He's very particular
about that. Kind, nice people, you know. Bones. I dare say you know
him," Mr. Amos added: "Mr. Bateman, who keeps the Bricklayers' Arms."

How funny, Gregory thought, to keep bricklayers' arms! And he wondered
why the bricklayers didn't keep their own arms, and who kept their
legs, and he might have asked if Mr. Amos had not called to a boy named
Jim to "bring Tartar over here, and look slippy."

While Jim was bringing Tartar,--who lived in a tub, and must therefore,
Mr. Lenox said, be called in future Diogenes,--Mr. Amos reminded them
how much more likely one is to get good watch-work from a dog who is
not of the highest breeding than from a prize-winner. "As I often say,"
he added, "you can have too much blood; that you can. Too much blood.
It's the only fault of many of my dogs."

Diogenes now stood before them, looking by no means overburdened with
blood and extremely ready for a new home.

Mr. Lenox asked why Mr. Amos thought he was a good watch-dog.

"Think!" said Mr. Amos. "I don't think; I know. If Mr. Bateman was here
and you were to hit him, that dog would kill you. No thinking twice,
mark you. He'd just kill you."

"I hope," said Mr. Lenox, "I shall never meet Mr. Bateman in his
presence. Suppose I were to fall against him accidentally--how
perfectly ghastly!"

"No fear of that," said Mr. Amos.

"A clever dog. He knows the difference between an attack and a feeling of faintness. But just come down to the Bricklayers' Arms, and I'll show you."

"No, thank you," said Mr. Lenox hastily. "How much is he?"

"Three pounds," said Mr. Amos.

"Oh, come!" said Mr. Lenox. "Not for a public-house dog."

"Not a penny less," said Mr. Amos.

"He's very well, then," said Mr. Lenox, "we must get on, Gregory. We
have still that other address."

"Two pounds ten," said Mr. Amos.

"Oh, no," said Mr. Lenox; "much too dear. Come along, Gregory."

"I'll tell you what I'll do," said Mr. Amos, "though it will be the end
of my friendship with Mr. Bateman. I'll say nothing about the collar
and chain, and take two pounds."

"Too dear," said Mr. Lenox, stepping to the taxi.

"Well, how much will you give?" Mr. Amos asked.

"I'll give you twenty-five shillings as he stands," said Mr. Lenox.

"He's yours," said Mr. Amos.

Mr. Lenox immediately paid the money, and then he went to a small
grocer's near by and bought a bag of biscuits, and with them he and
Gregory fed the famished Diogenes all the way back to Chiswick, and by
the time they reached home he seemed so affectionate with them as never
to have had another master.

Diogenes had come, of course, to stay; but the horse was merely to be
hired. To hire a carriage-horse or a riding-horse is easy enough, but a
cart-horse as strong as a steam-engine is more difficult to find.

Mr. Lenox decided to advertise, and he therefore sent the following
advertisement to the _Daily Telegram:_

"Wanted--To hire for a month at least, an exceedingly powerful, gentle
white horse to draw a caravan. Reply by letter. L., 'The Gables.'
Chiswick."

"There," said Mr. Lenox, as he read it out, "that's as clear as
crystal. No one can misunderstand that."

But, as a matter of fact, people will misunderstand anything; for on
the day the advertisement appeared quite a number of men called at "The
Gables," all leading horses of every size and colour. Kink was kept
busy in getting rid of them, but one man succeeded in finding Robert
unattended, and did all he could to persuade him that a pair of small
skew-bald ponies such as he had brought with him would be far more
useful in a caravan than one large cart-horse.

"Run in and tell your father that, old sport," said he. "Tell him I've
got a pair of skews here as will do him credit, and he shall have the
two for twenty pounds."

"No, no," said Robert; "they're no use at all. We advertised for one
large, strong white horse."

Mr. Crawley was coming away from the house at this moment, and the man
tackled him.

"Have the pair, mister," said the man. "They're wonderful
together--draw a pantechnicon. There's lots of white on them, too. Your
little boy here has taken such a fancy to them," he added. "Eighteen
pound for the two."

Another man, who brought a black horse and said that white horses
always had a defect somewhere, fastened on Miss Bingham.

"This is what you want, mum," he said. "Honest black. Never trust a
white horse," he said. "Black's the colour. Look at this mare
here--she's a beauty. Strong as an elephant and docile as a tortoise.
Fifteen quid, mum, and a bargain."

"My good man," said Miss Bingham, "you are laboring under a
misapprehension. I require no horse."

Fortunately, among the letters were several that told of exactly the
kind of horse that was needed, and one afternoon a stable boy led into
the yard a perfectly enormous creature which Mr. Lenox had hired for a
pound a week from a man at Finchley.

"Warranted sound in wind and limb," said Mr. Lenox, "and his name is
Moses."

Gregory, having given Moses a lump of sugar, declined ever again to
wish for a motor caravan, especially as Mr. Scott slipped into his hand
that evening a large knife containing eight useful articles, including
a hook for extracting stones from horses' feet.



CHAPTER 6

THE PLANS

The question where to go came next, and, compared with this, all the
other preparations had been simple. Here they were, with a caravan, and
a horse, and a driver, and a dog, and maps, and a mapmeasurer (do you
know what they're called?--they're called wealemafnas), and tents,
and--most of all--permission to be entirely alone; and it was not yet
decided where they were going.

Of course, as you may suppose, each of the party knew where he or she
wanted to go, but that was merely a private matter; no general decision
had been come to.

Mr. Crawley, who may be said to have lived for golf, suggested Ashdown
Forest, and then, he said, he could look them up from time to time if
they made a permanent camp there. But who wants to be looked up by a
tutor when one is on a caravan holiday?

Miss Bingham was in favour of an itinerary (as she called it) that
embraced two or three cathedral cities.

Mr. Lenox said: "Go to Sussex, and camp under the downs at night and
explore them by day."

Mr. Scott, on the other hand, said: "Go to Berkshire and see the White
Horse that Tom Hughes scoured and wrote about." And he promised to lend
them the book to convert them to this project.

Mrs. Avory declined to express any opinion. "It's your caravan," she
said, "and I would much rather you decided everything for yourselves."
(What a delightful mother!)

Janet wanted to go to the New Forest, because she had never been there,
and now was a chance, and because for many years "The Children of the
New Forest" had been her favourite story.

Robert wanted to go to Salisbury Plain and see the sun rise at
Stonehenge, and cast an eye over the military operations there.

Jack Rotheram wanted to go to Hambledon, in Hampshire, to see the
cradle of cricket, as it is called--the old ground on Broad Half-penny
Down where they used to play cricket in tall hats, as described in John
Nyren's book, which someone had given him.

Mary Rotheram wanted to go to Bredon Hill in Worcestershire, because
she had always wanted to ever since she had learned a song which began:

  "In summertime on Bredon
  The bells they sound so clear;
  Round both the shires they ring them
  In steeples far and near,
  A happy noise to hear.

  "Here of a Sunday morning
  My love and I would lie,
  And see the coloured counties,
  And hear the larks so high
  About us in the sky."

That line about the coloured counties had always fascinated her: she
had longed also to see them, lying beneath her, all spread out. The
coloured counties! She talked so enthusiastically and prettily about it
that she quite won over Robert, who decided that Bredon would be quite
as interesting as Salisbury Plain, and would give him practice, too, in
estimating square miles; so that there were two for Bredon Hill, as
against one for all the other places.

Gregory, however, was not for Bredon. He wanted to see the
flying-ground at Sheppey, which is in a totally different direction,
and perhaps induce someone with an aeroplane to give him a lift.

Horace Campbell sided with Gregory, while Hester voted continually and
feelingly for Stratford-on-Avon. To see Stratford-on-Avon--that was her
idea: to walk through the same streets as her beloved Shakespeare, to
see the place where his house had stood, to row on his river, to stand
by his tomb!

When the time came to discuss the journey seriously, it was Hester who
won. Stratford-on-Avon was decided on, with an extension to Bredon Hill
as the farthest point away, returning by way of Cheltenham and
Cirencester to Faringdon (for the White Horse), and then taking train
for home, and leaving Kink and Moses to do the remaining seventy miles
alone.

The distance from Bredon to Faringdon through Cheltenham, Cirencester,
and Fairford, was roughly forty-five miles, or five days of nine miles
each. Starting at Oxford, as was proposed, they would be three or four
days in getting to Stratford, and two days there; three days more, at
the most, in getting to Bredon, This would make eleven days altogether,
which would make, with rests on the two Sundays, and one whole day at
the White Horse, the full fortnight.

This, then, is what was at last decided: that Kink should get the
caravan to Oxford and be all ready for the children to join him on the
Wednesday morning. They should go down to Oxford on the day before and
be looked after by Mr. Lenox's young brother, who was at Oriel.

They should leave Oxford in the caravan on the next morning on their
way to Stratford-on-Avon.

The distance from Oxford to Stratford was thirty-nine miles, and it was
decided to do this in three days, which meant thirteen miles a day. The
first night, therefore, would be spent near Woodstock, the next near
Chipping Norton, and the third near Shipston down in the green meadows
on the banks of the Stour. At Stratford they would find Mrs. Avory
waiting for them, and stay with her at the Shakespeare Hotel for a day
or so. By that time they would know exactly how much or how little they
liked the caravan, and what things were necessary; and then Mrs. Avory
would go back and they would begin their real adventures. Could
anything be better? Although, of course, Robert was very contemptuous
of the Shakespeare Hotel part of the programme. "The idea of sleeping
in a bed!" he said.

The next thing to do was to apportion the various duties. Kink, of
course, was arranged for; he was to drive and to look after the horse
and sleep as near the caravan as could be managed; while Diogenes was
always to be on guard. Kink also was to see about water.

Janet was purser and steward. She had to decide what food was wanted,
and to keep the money. Hester was the official letter-writer, and was
under a promise to write home every other evening. Robert was the guide
and geographer; he kept the maps. He was also the telegraphist. Mary
Rotheram, who had taken lessons in cooking, was chief cook, and she was
to be helped by Janet. Jack was superintendent of the washing-up, and
Horace Campbell was his principal ally. (How tired they got of it!)
Jack, Horace, and Robert were carriers between the grocer's, the
butcher's, the baker's, and the Slowcoach.

It was arranged that Gregory, being the smallest and weakest, and
therefore the least likely to be refused, should g