# Metamorphoses
Author: Ovid
Category: 07_mitologia
Source: Gutenberg #21765
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:22:10.615425
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

[Transcriber’s Note:

  In the original text, words and phrases supplied by the translator
  were printed in _italics_. In this e-text they are shown in {braces}.
  Italics in the notes and commentary are shown conventionally with
  _lines_, boldface by =marks=.

  Line numbers from the original Latin poem were printed as headnotes
  on each page. For this e-text, only the line numbers of each complete
  “Fable” are given. Line numbers used in footnotes are retained from
  the original text; these, too, refer to the Latin poem and are
  independent of line divisions in the translation.

  Parts of this e-text use material from another edition of the Riley
  translation of the _Metamorphoses_: George Bell (London, 1893).
  Details are given at the end of the text, before the Errata. Each
  segment of the introductory material is individually identified.]




                      THE
             METAMORPHOSES OF OVID

              Vol. I--Books I-VII

LITERALLY TRANSLATED WITH NOTES AND EXPLANATIONS

                       by
              HENRY T. RILEY, M.A.

            With an Introduction by
               EDWARD BROOKS, JR.




        Copyright, 1899, By David McKay

                    Press Of
          Sherman & Co., Philadelphia




INTRODUCTION.

  [From Bell edition.]

The Metamorphoses of Ovid are a compendium of the Mythological
narratives of ancient Greece and Rome, so ingeniously framed, as to
embrace a large amount of information upon almost every subject
connected with the learning, traditions, manners, and customs of
antiquity, and have afforded a fertile field of investigation to the
learned of the civilized world. To present to the public a faithful
translation of a work, universally esteemed, not only for its varied
information, but as being the masterpiece of one of the greatest Poets
of ancient Rome, is the object of the present volume.

To render the work, which, from its nature and design, must, of
necessity, be replete with matter of obscure meaning, more inviting
to the scholar, and more intelligible to those who are unversed in
Classical literature, the translation is accompanied with Notes and
Explanations, which, it is believed, will be found to throw considerable
light upon the origin and meaning of some of the traditions of heathen
Mythology.

In the translation, the text of the Delphin edition has been generally
adopted; and no deviation has been made from it, except in a few
instances, where the reason for such a step is stated in the notes;
at the same time, the texts of Burmann and Gierig have throughout been
carefully consulted. The several editions vary materially in respect to
punctuation; the Translator has consequently used his own discretion in
adopting that which seemed to him the most fully to convey in each
passage the intended meaning of the writer.

The Metamorphoses of Ovid have been frequently translated into the
English language. On referring to Mr. Bohn’s excellent Catalogue of the
Greek and Latin Classics and their Translations, we find that the whole
of the work has been twice translated into English Prose, while five
translations in Verse are there enumerated. A prose version of the
Metamorphoses was published by Joseph Davidson, about the middle of
the last century, which professes to be “as near the original as the
different idioms of the Latin and English will allow;” and to be
“printed for the use of schools, as well as of private gentlemen.” A few
moments’ perusal of this work will satisfy the reader that it has not
the slightest pretension to be considered a literal translation, while,
by its departure from the strict letter of the author, it has gained
nothing in elegance of diction. It is accompanied by “critical,
historical, geographical, and classical notes in English, from the best
Commentators, both ancient and modern, beside a great number of notes,
entirely new;” but notwithstanding this announcement, these annotations
will be found to be but few in number, and, with some exceptions in the
early part of the volume, to throw very little light on the obscurities
of the text. A fifth edition of this translation was published so
recently as 1822, but without any improvement, beyond the furbishing up
of the old-fashioned language of the original preface. A far more
literal translation of the Metamorphoses is that by John Clarke, which
was first published about the year 1735, and had attained to a seventh
edition in 1779. Although this version may be pronounced very nearly to
fulfil the promise set forth in its title page, of being “as literal as
possible,” still, from the singular inelegance of its style, and the
fact of its being couched in the conversational language of the early
part of the last century, and being unaccompanied by any attempt at
explanation, it may safely be pronounced to be ill adapted to the
requirements of the present age. Indeed, it would not, perhaps, be too
much to assert, that, although the translator may, in his own words,
“have done an acceptable service to such gentlemen as are desirous of
regaining or improving the skill they acquired at school,” he has, in
many instances, burlesqued rather than translated his author. Some of
the curiosities of his version will be found set forth in the notes;
but, for the purpose of the more readily justifying this assertion, a
few of them are adduced: the word “nitidus” is always rendered “neat,”
whether applied to a fish, a cow, a chariot, a laurel, the steps of a
temple, or the art of wrestling. He renders “horridus,” “in a rude
pickle;” “virgo” is generally translated “the young lady;” “vir” is
“a gentleman;” “senex” and “senior” are indifferently “the old blade,”
“the old fellow,” or “the old gentleman;” while “summa arx” is “the very
tip-top.” “Misera” is “poor soul;” “exsilio” means “to bounce forth;”
“pellex” is “a miss;” “lumina” are “the peepers;” “turbatum fugere” is
“to scower off in a mighty bustle;” “confundor” is “to be jumbled;” and
“squalidus” is “in a sorry pickle.” “Importuna” is “a plaguy baggage;”
“adulterium” is rendered “her pranks;” “ambages” becomes either “a long
rabble of words,” “a long-winded detail,” or “a tale of a tub;”
“miserabile carmen” is “a dismal ditty;” “increpare hos” is “to rattle
these blades;” “penetralia” means “the parlour;” while “accingere,” more
literally than elegantly, is translated “buckle to.” “Situs” is “nasty
stuff;” “oscula jungere” is “to tip him a kiss;” “pingue ingenium” is a
circumlocution for “a blockhead;” “anilia instrumenta” are “his old
woman’s accoutrements;” and “repetito munere Bacchi” is conveyed to the
sense of the reader as, “they return again to their bottle, and take the
other glass.” These are but a specimen of the blemishes which disfigure
the most literal of the English translations of the Metamorphoses.

In the year 1656, a little volume was published, by J[ohn] B[ulloker,]
entitled “Ovid’s Metamorphosis, translated grammatically, and, according
to the propriety of our English tongue, so far as grammar and the verse
will bear, written chiefly for the use of schools, to be used according
to the directions in the preface to the painfull schoolmaster, and more
fully in the book called, ‘Ludus Literarius, or the Grammar school,
chap. 8.’” Notwithstanding a title so pretentious, it contains a
translation of no more than the first 567 lines of the first Book,
executed in a fanciful and pedantic manner; and its rarity is now the
only merit of the volume. A literal interlinear translation of the first
Book “on the plan recommended by Mr. Locke,” was published in 1839,
which had been already preceded by “a selection from the Metamorphoses
of Ovid, adapted to the Hamiltonian system, by a literal and interlineal
translation,” published by James Hamilton, the author of the Hamiltonian
system. This work contains selections only from the first six books, and
consequently embraces but a very small portion of the entire work.

For the better elucidation of the different fabulous narratives and
allusions, explanations have been added, which are principally derived
from the writings of Herodotus, Apollodorus, Pausanias, Dio Cassius,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Strabo, Hyginus, Nonnus, and others of the
historians, philosophers, and mythologists of antiquity. A great number
of these illustrations are collected in the elaborate edition of Ovid,
published by the Abbé Banier, one of the most learned scholars of the
last century; who has, therein, and in his “Explanations of the Fables
of Antiquity,” with indefatigable labour and research, culled from the
works of ancient authors, all such information as he considered likely
to throw any light upon the Mythology and history of Greece and Rome.

This course has been adopted, because it was considered that a statement
of the opinions of contemporary authors would be the most likely to
enable the reader to form his own ideas upon the various subjects
presented to his notice. Indeed, except in two or three instances, space
has been found too limited to allow of more than an occasional reference
to the opinions of modern scholars. Such being the object of the
explanations, the reader will not be surprised at the absence of
critical and lengthened discussions on many of those moot points of
Mythology and early history which have occupied, with no very positive
result, the attention of Niebuhr, Lobeck, Müller, Buttmann, and many
other scholars of profound learning.




  A SYNOPTICAL VIEW
  of the Principal Transformations Mentioned in
  THE METAMORPHOSES.

  [From Bell edition, omitting Books VIII-XV.]


BOOK I.

Chaos is divided by the Deity into four Elements: to these their
respective inhabitants are assigned, and man is created from earth and
water. The four Ages follow, and in the last of these the Giants aspire
to the sovereignty of the heavens; being slain by Jupiter, a new race of
men springs up from their blood. These becoming noted for their impiety,
Jupiter not only transforms Lycaon into a wolf, but destroys the whole
race of men and animals by a Deluge, with the exception of Deucalion and
Pyrrha, who, when the waters have abated, renew the human race, by
throwing stones behind them. Other animated beings are produced by heat
and moisture: and, among them, the serpent Python. Phœbus slays him, and
institutes the Pythian games as a memorial of the event, in which the
conquerors are crowned with beech; for as yet the laurel does not exist,
into which Daphne is changed soon after, while flying from Phœbus. On
this taking place, the other rivers repair to her father Peneus, either
to congratulate or to console him; but Inachus is not there, as he is
grieving for his daughter Io, whom Jupiter, having first ravished her,
has changed into a cow. She is entrusted by Juno to the care of Argus;
Mercury having first related to him the transformation of the Nymph
Syrinx into reeds, slays him, on which his eyes are placed by Juno in
the tail of the peacock. Io, having recovered human shape, becomes the
mother of Epaphus.


BOOK II.

Epaphus, having accused Phaëton of falsely asserting that Phœbus is his
father, Phaëton requests Phœbus, as a proof of his affection towards his
child, to allow him the guidance of the chariot of the Sun for one day.
This being granted, the whole earth is set on fire by him, and the
Æthiopians are turned black by the heat. Jupiter strikes Phaëton with a
thunderbolt, and while his sisters and his kinsman Cyenus are lamenting
him, the former are changed into trees, and Cyenus into a swan. On
visiting the earth, that he may repair the damage caused by the
conflagration, Jupiter sees Calisto, and, assuming the form of Diana, he
debauches her. Juno, being enraged, changes Calisto into a bear; and her
own son Arcas being about to pierce her with an arrow, Jupiter places
them both among the Constellations. Juno having complained of this to
Oceanus, is borne back to the heavens by her peacocks, who have so
lately changed their colour; a thing which has also happened to the
raven, which has been lately changed from white to black, he having
refused to listen to the warnings of the crow (who relates the story of
its own transformation, and of that of Nyctimene into an owl), and
having persisted in informing Phœbus of the intrigues of Coronis. Her
son Æsculapius being cut out of the womb of Coronis and carried to the
cave of Chiron the Centaur, Ocyrrhoë, the daughter of Chiron, is changed
into a mare, while she is prophesying. Her father in vain invokes the
assistance of Apollo, for he, in the guise of a shepherd, is tending his
oxen in the country of Elis. He neglecting his herd, Mercury takes the
opportunity of stealing it; after which he changes Battus into a
touchstone, for betraying him. Flying thence, Mercury beholds Herse, the
daughter of Cecrops, and debauches her. Her sister Aglauros, being
envious of her, is changed into a rock. Mercury returns to heaven, on
which Jupiter orders him to drive the herds of Agenor towards the shore;
and then, assuming the form of a bull, he carries Europa over the sea to
the isle of Crete.


BOOK III.

Agenor commands his son Cadmus to seek his sister Europa. While he is
doing this, he slays a dragon in Bœotia; and having sowed its teeth in
the earth, men are produced, with whose assistance he builds the walls
of Thebes. His first cause of grief is the fate of his grandson Actæon,
who, being changed into a stag, is torn to pieces by his own hounds.
This, however, gives pleasure to Juno, who hates not only Semele, the
daughter of Cadmus, and the favourite of Jupiter, but all the house of
Agenor as well. Assuming the form of Beroë, she contrives the
destruction of Semele by the lightnings of Jupiter; while Bacchus, being
saved alive from his mother’s womb, is brought up on the earth. Jupiter
has a discussion with Juno on the relative pleasures of the sexes, and
they agree to refer the question to Tiresias, who has been of both
sexes. He gives his decision in favour of Jupiter, on which Juno
deprives him of sight; and, by way of recompense, Jupiter bestows on him
the gift of prophesy. His first prediction is fulfilled in the case of
Narcissus, who, despising the advances of all females (in whose number
is Echo, who has been transformed into a sound), at last pines away with
love for himself, and is changed into a flower which bears his name.
Pentheus, however, derides the prophet; who predicts his fate, and his
predictions are soon verified; for, on the celebration of the orgies,
Bacchus having assumed a disguise, is brought before him; and having
related to Pentheus the story of the transformation of the Etrurian
sailors into dolphins, he is thrown into prison. On this, Pentheus is
torn in pieces by the Bacchanals, and great respect is afterwards paid
to the rites of Bacchus.


BOOK IV.

Still Alcithoë and her sisters, neglecting the rites, attend to their
spinning, during the festivities, and pass the time in telling stories;
and, among others, that of Pyramus and Thisbe, by whose blood the
mulberry is turned from white to black, and that of the discovery of the
intrigues of Mars and Venus, on the information of the Sun. They also
tell how the Sun assumed the form of Eurynome, that he might enjoy her
daughter Leucothoë; how Clytie, becoming jealous of her sister, was
transformed into a sun-flower; and how Salmacis and Hermaphroditus had
become united into one body. After this, through the agency of Bacchus,
the sisters are transformed into bats, and their webs are changed into
vines. Ino rejoicing at this, Juno, in her hatred and indignation, sends
one of the Furies to her, who causes her to be struck with insanity, on
which she leaps into the sea, with her son Melicerta in her arms; but by
the intercession of Venus, they become sea Deities, and their Sidonian
attendants, who are bewailing them as dead, are changed into rocks.
Cadmus, afflicted at this fresh calamity, retires from Thebes, and flies
to Illyria, together with his wife, where they are both transformed into
serpents. Of those who despise Bacchus, Acrisius alone remains, the
grandfather of Perseus, who, having cut off the head of the Gorgon
Medusa, serpents are produced by her blood. Perseus turns Atlas into a
mountain, and having liberated Andromeda, he changes sea-weed into
coral, and afterwards marries her.


BOOK V.

A tumult arising during the celebration of the nuptials, Phineus claims
Andromeda, who has been betrothed to him; and together with Prœtus, he
and Polydectes are turned into stone. Pallas, who has aided Perseus, now
leaves him, and goes to Helicon, to see the fountain of Hippocrene. The
Muses tell her the story of Pyreneus and the Pierides, who were
transformed into magpies after they had repeated various songs on the
subjects of the transformation of the Deities into various forms of
animals; the rape of Proserpine, the wanderings of Ceres, the change of
Cyane into a fountain, of a boy into a lizard, of Ascalaphus into an
owl, of the Sirens into birds in part, of Arethusa into a spring, of
Lyncus into a lynx, and of the invention of agriculture by Triptolemus.


BOOK VI.

Influenced by the example of the Muses, Pallas determines on the
destruction of Arachne. She enters with her into a contest for the
superiority in the art of weaving. Each represents various
transformations on her web, and then Arachne is changed into a spider.
Niobe, however, is not deterred thereby from preferring her own lot to
that of Latona; on account of which, all her children are slain by
Apollo and Diana, and she is changed into a rock. On learning this,
while one person relates the transformation by Latona of the Lycian
rustics into frogs, another calls to mind how Marsyas was flayed by
Apollo. Niobe is lamented by Pelops, whose shoulder is of ivory. To
console the Thebans in their afflictions, ambassadors come from the
adjacent cities. The Athenians alone are absent, as they are attacked by
hordes of barbarians, who are routed by Tereus, who marries Progne, the
daughter of Pandion. Tereus coming a second time to Athens, takes back
with him to his kingdom Philomela, his wife’s sister; and having
committed violence on her, with other enormities, he is transformed into
a hoopoe, while Philomela is changed into a nightingale, and Progne
becomes a swallow. Pandion, hearing of these wondrous events dies of
grief. Erectheus succeeds him, whose daughter, Orithyia, is ravished by
Boreas, and by him is the mother of Calais and Zethes, who are of the
number of the Argonauts on the following occasion.


BOOK VII.

Jason, by the aid of Medea, having conquered the bulls that breathe
forth flames, having sowed the teeth of a serpent, from which armed men
are produced, and having lulled the dragon to sleep, recovers the Golden
Fleece. Medea, accompanying Jason to Greece, restores Æson to youth by
the aid of drugs; and promising the same to Pelias, having first, as a
specimen, changed a ram into a lamb, by stratagem she kills him. Passing
through many places made remarkable by various transformations, and
having slain her children, she marries Ægeus, when Theseus returns home,
and narrowly escapes being poisoned by her magic potions. Minos
interrupts the joy of Ægeus on the return of his son, and wages war
against him; having collected troops from all parts, even from Paros,
where Arne has been changed into a jackdaw. Minos endeavours to gain the
alliance of Æacus, who, however, refuses it, and sends the Myrmidons,
(who have been changed into ants from men after a severe pestilence),
under the command of Cephalus to assist Ægeus. Cephalus relates to
Phocus, the son of Æacus, how, being carried off by Aurora and assuming
another shape, he had induced his wife Procris to prove faithless; and
how he had received from her a dog and a javelin, the former of which,
together with a fox, was changed into stone; while the latter, by
inadvertence, caused the death of his wife.




INTRODUCTION.

  [By Edward Brooks, Jr., from McKay edition.]

P. Ovidius Naso--commonly known as Ovid--was born at Sulmo, about,
ninety miles from Rome, in the year 43 B.C. His father belonged to an
old equestrian family, and at an early age brought his son to Rome,
where he was educated under the most distinguished masters. Very little
is known of the poet’s life, except that which is gathered from his own
writings. After finishing his education at home he visited Athens, in
company with the poet Macer, for the purpose of completing his studies,
and before returning visited the magnificent cities of Asia Minor and
spent nearly a year in Sicily.

Although as a young man Ovid showed a natural taste and inclination for
poetical composition, he was by no means encouraged to indulge in this
pursuit. His father thought that the profession of law was much more apt
to lead to distinction and political eminence than the vocation of a
poet. He therefore dissuaded his son from writing poetry and urged him
to devote himself to the legal profession. Compliance with his father’s
wishes led him to spend much time in the forum, and for a while poetry
was abandoned. Upon attaining his majority, he held several minor
offices of state; but neither his health nor his inclinations would
permit him to perform the duties of public life. Poetry was his love,
and in spite of the strong objections of his father, he resolved to
abandon the law courts and devote himself to a more congenial
occupation. He sought the society of the most distinguished poets of the
day, and his admiration for them amounted almost to reverence. He
numbered among his intimate friends the poets Macer, Propertius,
Ponticus and Bassus, while Æmilius Macer, Virgil’s contemporary, used to
read his compositions to him, and even the fastidious Horace, it is
said, occasionally delighted the young man’s ear with the charm of his
verse.

Ovid was married three times. His first wife he married when little more
than a boy, and the union does not seem to have been a happy one, though
it was probably due to no fault of the wife. His second wife seems also
to have been of blameless character, but his love for her was of short
duration. His third wife was a lady of the great Fabian house and a
friend of the Empress Livia. She appears to have been a woman in every
way worthy of the great and lasting love which the poet lavished upon
her to the day of his death.

Up to the age of fifty Ovid had lived a life of prosperity and
happiness. Though not a wealthy man, his means were such as to permit
him to indulge in the luxuries of refined life, and his attainments as a
poet had surrounded him with a circle of most desirable friends and
admirers. He had even obtained the favor and patronage of the royal
family. About the year 8 A.D. he, however, incurred the great
displeasure of Augustus, and was ordered by him to withdraw from Rome
and dwell in the colony of Tomi, on the shore of the Euxine sea. Leaving
behind him a wife to whom he was devotedly attached he obeyed the edict
of his emperor and entered upon an exile from which he was destined
never to return. He died in banishment at Tomi in the year 18 A.D.

The exact reason for Ovid’s banishment has never been clear, though
there have been many conjectures as to the cause. About two years
previous to his exile Ovid had published a composition which had greatly
displeased Augustus, on account of its immoral tendency. Almost
coincident with this publication was the discovery of the scandal
relating to Julia, daughter of the emperor. It is probable that the
proximity of these two events tended to intensify the imperial
displeasure, and when some time later there was made public the intrigue
of the emperor’s granddaughter, the indignation of Augustus gave itself
vent in the banishment of Ovid.

The writings of Ovid consist of the _Amores_ in three books; the _Heroic
Epistles_, twenty-one in number; the _Ars Amatoria_; the _Remedia
Amoris_; the _Metamorphoses_, in fifteen books; the _Fasti_, in six
books; the _Tristia_, in five books; the _Epistles_, in four books, and
a few minor poems. In the following pages will be found a translation of
the _Metamorphoses_.






THE METAMORPHOSES.




BOOK THE FIRST.


THE ARGUMENT. [I.1-4]

My design leads me to speak of forms changed into new bodies.[1] Ye
Gods, (for you it was who changed them,) favor my attempts,[2] and bring
down the lengthened narrative from the very beginning of the world,
{even} to my own times.[3]

    [Footnote 1: _Forms changed into new bodies._--Ver. 1. Some
    commentators cite these words as an instance of Hypallage as being
    used for ‘corpora mutata in novas formas,’ ‘bodies changed into
    new forms;’ and they fancy that there is a certain beauty in the
    circumstance that the proposition of a subject which treats of the
    changes and variations of bodies should be framed with a
    transposition of words. This supposition is perhaps based rather
    on the exuberance of a fanciful imagination than on solid grounds,
    as if it is an instance of Hypallage, it is most probably quite
    accidental; while the passage may be explained without any
    reference to Hypallage, as the word ‘forma’ is sometimes used to
    signify the thing itself; thus the words ‘formæ deorum’ and
    ‘ferarum’ are used to signify ‘the Gods,’ or ‘the wild beasts’
    themselves.]

    [Footnote 2: _Favor my attempts._--Ver. 3. This use of the word
    ‘adspirate’ is a metaphor taken from the winds, which, while they
    fill the ship’s sails, were properly said ‘adspirare.’ It has been
    remarked, with some justice, that this invocation is not
    sufficiently long or elaborate for a work of so grave and
    dignified a nature as the Metamorphoses.]

    [Footnote 3: _To my own times._--Ver. 4. That is, to the days of
    Augustus Cæsar.]


FABLE I. [I.5-31]

  God reduces Chaos into order. He separates the four elements, and
  disposes the several bodies, of which the universe is formed, into
  their proper situations.

At first, the sea, the earth, and the heaven, which covers all things,
were the only face of nature throughout the whole universe, which men
have named Chaos; a rude and undigested mass,[4] and nothing {more} than
an inert weight, and the discordant atoms of things not harmonizing,
heaped together in the same spot. No Sun[5] as yet gave light to the
world; nor did the Moon,[6] by increasing, recover her horns anew. The
Earth did not {as yet} hang in the surrounding air, balanced by its own
weight, nor had Amphitrite[7] stretched out her arms along the
lengthened margin of the coasts. Wherever, too, was the land, there also
was the sea and the air; {and} thus was the earth without firmness, the
sea unnavigable, the air void of light; in no one {of them} did its
{present} form exist. And one was {ever} obstructing the other; because
in the same body the cold was striving with the hot, the moist with the
dry, the soft with the hard, things having weight with {those} devoid of
weight.

To this discord God and bounteous Nature[8] put an end; for he separated
the earth from the heavens, and the waters from the earth, and
distinguished the clear heavens from the gross atmosphere. And after he
had unravelled these {elements}, and released them from {that} confused
heap, he combined them, {thus} disjoined, in harmonious unison, {each}
in {its proper} place. The element of the vaulted heaven,[9] fiery and
without weight, shone forth, and selected a place for itself in the
highest region; next after it, {both} in lightness and in place, was the
air; the Earth was more weighty than these, and drew {with it} the more
ponderous atoms, and was pressed together by its own gravity. The
encircling waters sank to the lowermost place,[10] and surrounded the
solid globe.

    [Footnote 4: _A rude and undigested mass._--Ver. 7. This is very
    similar to the words of the Scriptures, ‘And the earth was without
    form and void,’ Genesis, ch. i. ver. 2.]

    [Footnote 5: _No Sun._--Ver. 10. Titan. The Sun is so called, on
    account of his supposed father, Hyperion, who was one of the
    Titans. Hyperion is thought to have been the first who, by
    assiduous observation, discovered the course of the Sun, Moon, and
    other luminaries. By them he regulated the time for the seasons,
    and imparted this knowledge to others. Being thus, as it were, the
    father of astronomy, he has been feigned by the poets to have been
    the father of the Sun and the Moon.]

    [Footnote 6: _The Moon._--Ver. 11. Phœbe. The Moon is so called
    from the Greek φοῖβος, ‘shining,’ and as being the sister of
    Phœbus, Apollo, or the Sun.]

    [Footnote 7: _Amphitrite._--Ver. 14. She was the daughter of
    Oceanus and Doris, and the wife of Neptune, God of the Sea. Being
    the Goddess of the Ocean, her name is here used to signify the
    ocean itself.]

    [Footnote 8: _Nature._--Ver. 21. ‘Natura’ is a word often used by
    the Poet without any determinate signification, and to its
    operations are ascribed all those phenomena which it is found
    difficult or impossible to explain upon known and established
    principles. In the present instance it may be considered to mean
    the invisible agency of the Deity in reducing Chaos into a form of
    order and consistency. ‘Et’ is therefore here, as grammarians term
    it, an expositive particle; as if the Poet had said, ‘Deus sive
    natura,’ ‘God, or in other words, nature.’]

    [Footnote 9: _The element of the vaulted heaven._--Ver. 26. This
    is a periphrasis, signifying the regions of the firmament or upper
    air, in which the sun and stars move; which was supposed to be of
    the purest fire and the source of all flame. The heavens are
    called ‘convex,’ from being supposed to assume the same shape as
    the terrestrial globe which they surround.]

    [Footnote 10: _The lowermost place._--Ver. 31. ‘Ultima’ must not
    be here understood in the presence of ‘infima,’ or as signifying
    ‘last,’ or ‘lowest,’ in a strict philosophical sense, for that
    would contradict the account of the formation of the world given
    by Hesiod, and which is here closely followed by Ovid; indeed, it
    would contradict his own words,--‘Circumfluus humor coercuit
    solidum orbem.’ The meaning seems to be, that the waters possess
    the lowest place only in respect to the earth whereon we tread,
    and not relatively to the terrestrial globe, the supposed centre
    of the system, inasmuch as the external surface of the earth in
    some places rises considerably, and leaves the water to subside in
    channels.]


EXPLANATION.

  The ancient philosophers, unable to comprehend how something could be
  produced out of nothing, supposed a matter pre-existent to the Earth
  in its present shape, which afterwards received form and order from
  some powerful cause. According to them, God was not the Creator, but
  the Architect of the universe, in ranging and disposing the elements
  in situations most suitable to their respective qualities. This is the
  Chaos so often sung of by the poets, and which Hesiod was the first to
  mention.

  It is clear that this system was but a confused and disfigured
  tradition of the creation of the world, as mentioned by Moses; and
  thus, beneath these fictions, there lies some faint glimmering of
  truth. The first two chapters of the book of Genesis will be found to
  throw considerable light on the foundation of this Mythological system
  of the world’s formation.

  Hesiod, the most ancient of the heathen writers who have enlarged upon
  this subject, seems to have derived much of his information from the
  works of Sanchoniatho, who is supposed to have borrowed his ideas
  concerning Chaos from that passage in the second verse of the first
  Chapter of Genesis, which mentions the darkness that was spread over
  the whole universe--‘and darkness was upon the face of the deep’--for
  he expresses himself almost in those words. Sanchoniatho lived before
  the Trojan war, and professed to have received his information
  respecting the original construction of the world from a priest of
  ‘Jehovah,’ named Jerombaal. He wrote in the Phœnician language; but we
  have only a translation of his works, by Philo Judæus, which is by
  many supposed to be spurious. It is, however, very probable, that from
  him the Greeks borrowed their notions regarding Chaos, which they
  mingled with fables of their own invention.


FABLE II. [I.32-88]

  After the separation of matter, God gives form and regularity to the
  universe; and all other living creatures being produced, Prometheus
  moulds earth tempered with water, into a human form, which is animated
  by Minerva.

When thus he, whoever of the Gods he was,[11] had divided the mass {so}
separated, and reduced it, so divided, into {distinct} members; in the
first place, that it might not be unequal on any side, he gathered it up
into the form of a vast globe; then he commanded the sea to be poured
around it, and to grow boisterous with the raging winds, and to surround
the shores of the Earth, encompassed {by it}; he added also springs, and
numerous pools and lakes, and he bounded the rivers as they flowed
downwards, with slanting banks. These, different in {different} places,
are some of them swallowed up[12] by {the Earth} itself; some of them
reach the ocean, and, received in the expanse of waters that take a
freer range, beat against shores instead of banks.

He commanded the plains,[13] too, to be extended, the valleys to sink
down, the woods to be clothed with green leaves, the craggy mountains to
arise; and, as on the right-hand side,[14] two Zones intersect the
heavens, and as many on the left; {and as} there is a fifth hotter than
these, so did the care of the Deity distinguish this enclosed mass {of
the Earth} by the same number, and as many climates are marked out upon
the Earth. Of these, that which is the middle one[15] is not habitable
on account of the heat; deep snow covers two[16] {of them}. Between
either these he placed as many more,[17] and gave them a temperate
climate, heat being mingled with cold.

Over these hangs the air, which is heavier than fire, in the same degree
that the weight of water is lighter than the weight of the earth. Here
he ordered vapors, here too, the clouds to take their station; the
thunder, too, to terrify the minds of mortals, and with the lightnings,
the winds that bring on cold. The Contriver of the World did not allow
these indiscriminately to take possession of the sky. Even now,
(although they each of them govern their own blasts in a distinct tract)
they are with great difficulty prevented from rending the world asunder,
so great is the discord of the brothers.[18] Eurus took his way[19]
towards {the rising of} Aurora and the realms of Nabath[20] and Persia,
and the mountain ridges exposed to the rays of the morning. The Evening
star, and the shores which are warm with the setting sun, are bordering
upon Zephyrus.[21] The terrible Boreas invaded Scythia,[22] and the
regions of the North. The opposite quarter is wet with continual clouds,
and the drizzling South Wind.[23] Over these he placed the firmament,
clear and devoid of gravity, and not containing anything of the dregs of
earth.

Scarcely had he separated all these by fixed limits, when the stars,
which had long lain hid, concealed beneath that mass {of Chaos}, began
to glow through the range of the heavens. And that no region might be
destitute of its own {peculiar} animated beings, the stars and the forms
of the Gods[24] possess the tract of heaven; the waters fell to be
inhabited by the smooth fishes;[25] the Earth received the wild beasts,
{and} the yielding air the birds.

{But} an animated being, more holy than these, more fitted to receive
higher faculties, and which could rule over the rest,[26] was still
wanting. {Then} Man was formed. Whether it was that the Artificer of all
things, the original of the world in its improved state, framed him from
divine elements;[27] or whether, the Earth, being newly made, and but
lately divided from the lofty æther, still retained some atoms of its
kindred heaven, which, tempered with the waters of the stream, the son
of Iapetus fashioned after the image of the Gods, who rule over all
things. And, whereas other animals bend their looks downwards upon the
Earth, to Man he gave a countenance to look on high and to behold the
heavens, and to raise his face erect to the stars. Thus, that which had
been lately rude earth, and without any regular shape, being changed,
assumed the form of Man, {till then} unknown.

    [Footnote 11: _Whoever of the Gods he was._--Ver. 32. By this
    expression the Poet perhaps may intend to intimate that the God
    who created the world was some more mighty Divinity than those who
    were commonly accounted Deities.]

    [Footnote 12: _Are some of them swallowed up._--Ver. 40. He here
    refers to those rivers which, at some distance from their sources,
    disappear and continue their course under ground. Such was the
    stream of Arethusa, the Lycus in Asia, the Erasinus in Argolis,
    the Alpheus in Peloponnesus, the Arcas in Spain, and the Rhone in
    France. Most of these, however, after descending into the earth,
    appear again and discharge their waters into the sea.]

    [Footnote 13: _He commanded the plains._--Ver. 43. The use here of
    the word ‘jussit,’ signifying ‘ordered,’ or ‘commanded,’ is
    considered as being remarkably sublime and appropriate, and
    serving well to express the ease wherewith an infinitely powerful
    Being accomplishes the most difficult works. There is the same
    beauty here that was long since remarked by Longinus, one of the
    most celebrated critics among the ancients, in the words used by
    Moses, ‘And God said, Let there be light, and there was light,’
    Genesis, ch. i. ver. 3.]

    [Footnote 14: _On the right-hand side._--Ver. 45. The “right hand”
    here refers to the northern part of the globe, and the “left hand”
    to the southern. He here speaks of the zones. Astronomers have
    divided the heavens into five parallel circles. First, the
    equinoctial, which lies in the middle, between the poles of the
    earth, and obtains its name from the equality of days and nights
    on the earth while the sun is in its plane. On each side are the
    two tropics, at the distance of 23 deg. 30 min., and described by
    the sun when in his greatest declination north and south, or at
    the summer and winter solstices. That on the north side of the
    equinoctial is called the tropic of Cancer, because the sun
    describes it when in that sign of the ecliptic; and that on the
    south side is, for a similar reason, called the tropic of
    Capricorn. Again, at the distance of 23½ degrees from the poles
    are two other parallels called the polar circles, either because
    they are near to the poles, or because, if we suppose the whole
    frame of the heavens to turn round on the plane of the
    equinoctial, these circles are marked out by the poles of the
    ecliptic. By means of these parallels, astronomers have divided
    the heavens into four zones or tracks. The whole space between the
    two tropics is the middle or torrid zone, which the equinoctial
    divides into two equal parts. On each side of this are the
    temperate zones, which extend from the tropics to the two polar
    circles. And lastly, the portions enclosed by the polar circles
    make up the frigid zones. As the planes of these circles produced
    till they reached the earth, would also impress similar parallels
    upon it, and divide it in the same manner as they divide the
    heavens, astronomers have conceived five zones upon the earth,
    corresponding to those in the heavens, and bounded by the same
    circles.]

    [Footnote 15: _That which is the middle one._--Ver. 49. The
    ecliptic in which the sun moves, cuts the equator in two opposite
    points, at an angle of 23½ degrees; and runs obliquely from one
    tropic to another, and returns again in a corresponding direction.
    Hence, the sun, which in the space of a year, performs the
    revolution of this circle, must in that time be twice vertical to
    every place in the torrid zone, except directly under the tropics,
    and his greatest distance from their zenith at noon, cannot exceed
    47 degrees. Thus his rays being often perpendicular, or nearly so,
    and never very oblique, must strike more forcibly, and cause more
    intense heat in that spot. Being little acquainted with the extent
    and situation of the earth, the ancients believed it
    uninhabitable. Modern discovery has shown that this is not the
    case as to a considerable part of the torrid zone, though with
    some parts of it our acquaintance is still very limited.]

    [Footnote 16: _Deep snow covers two._--Ver. 50. The two polar or
    frigid zones. For as the sun never approaches these nearer than
    the tropic on that side, and is, during one part of the year,
    removed by the additional extent of the whole torrid zone, his
    rays must be very oblique and faint, so as to leave these tracts
    exposed to almost perpetual cold.]

    [Footnote 17: _He placed as many more._--Ver. 51. The temperate
    zones, lying between the torrid and the frigid, partake of the
    character of each in a modified degree, and are of a middle
    temperature between hot and cold. Here, too, the distinction of
    the seasons is manifest. For in either temperate zone, when the
    sun is in that tropic, which borders upon it, being nearly
    vertical, the heat must be considerable, and produce summer; but
    when he is removed to the other tropic by a distance of 47
    degrees, his rays will strike but faintly, and winter will be the
    consequence. The intermediate spaces, while he is moving from one
    tropic to the other, make spring and autumn.]

    [Footnote 18: _The brothers._--Ver. 60. That is, the winds, who,
    according to the Theogony of Hesiod, were the sons of Astreus, the
    giant, and Aurora.]

    [Footnote 19: _Eurus took his way._--Ver. 61. The Poet, after
    remarking that the air is the proper region of the winds, proceeds
    to take notice that God, to prevent them from making havoc of the
    creation, subjected them to particular laws, and assigned to each
    the quarter whence to direct his blasts. Eurus is the east wind,
    being so called from its name, because it blows from the east. As
    Aurora, or the morning, was always ushered in by the sun, who
    rises eastward, she was supposed to have her habitation in the
    eastern quarter of the world; and often, in the language of
    ancient poetry, her name signifies the east.]

    [Footnote 20: _The realms of Nabath._--Ver. 61. From Josephus we
    learn that Nabath, the son of Ishmael, with his eleven brothers,
    took possession of all the country from the river Euphrates to the
    Red Sea, and called it Nabathæa. Pliny the Elder and Strabo speak
    of the Nabatæi as situated between Babylon and Arabia Felix, and
    call their capital Petra. Tacitus, in his Annals (Book ii.
    ch. 57), speaks of them as having a king. Perhaps the term
    ‘Nabathæa regna’ implies here, generally, the whole of Arabia.]

    [Footnote 21: _Are bordering upon Zephyrus._--Ver. 63. The region
    where the sun sets, that is to say, the western part of the world,
    was assigned by the ancients to the Zephyrs, or west winds, so
    called by a Greek derivation because they cherish and enliven
    nature.]

    [Footnote 22: _Boreas invaded Scythia._--Ver. 34. Under the name
    of Scythia, the ancients generally comprehended all the countries
    situate in the extreme northern regions. ‘Septem trio,’ meaning
    the northern region of the world, is so called from the ‘Triones,’
    a constellation of seven stars, near the North Pole, known also as
    the Ursa Major, or Greater Bear, and among the country people of
    our time by the name of Charles’s Wain. Boreas, one of the names
    of ‘Aquilo,’ or the ‘north wind,’ is derived from a Greek word,
    signifying ‘an eddy.’ This name was probably given to it from its
    causing whirlwinds occasionally by its violence.]

    [Footnote 23: _The drizzling South Wind._--Ver. 66. The South Wind
    is especially called rainy, because, blowing from the
    Mediterranean sea on the coast of France and Italy, it generally
    brings with it clouds and rain.]

    [Footnote 24: _The forms of the Gods._--Ver. 73. There is some
    doubt what the Poet here means by the ‘forms of the Gods.’ Some
    think that the stars are meant, as if it were to be understood
    that they are forms of the Gods. But it is most probably only a
    poetical expression for the Gods themselves, and he here assigns
    the heavens as the habitation of the Gods and the stars; these
    last, according to the notion of the Platonic philosophers being
    either intelligent beings, or guided and actuated by such.]

    [Footnote 25: _Inhabited by the smooth fishes._--Ver. 74.
    ‘Cesserunt nitidis habitandæ piscibus;’ Clarke translates ‘fell
    to the neat fishes to inhabit.’]

    [Footnote 26: _Could rule over the rest._--Ver. 77. This strongly
    brings to mind the words of the Creator, described in the first
    chapter of Genesis, ver. 28. ‘And God said unto them--_have
    dominion_ over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
    and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.’]

    [Footnote 27: _Framed him from divine elements._--Ver. 78. We have
    here strong grounds for contending that the ancient philosophers,
    and after them the poets, in their account of the creation of the
    world followed a tradition that had been copied from the Books of
    Moses. The formation of man, in Ovid, as well as in the Book of
    Genesis, is the last work of the Creator, and was, for the same
    purpose, that man might have dominion over the other animated
    works of the creation.]


EXPLANATION.

  According to Ovid, as in the book of Genesis, man is the last work of
  the Creator. The information derived from Holy Writ is here presented
  to us, in a disfigured form. Prometheus, who tempers the earth, and
  Minerva, who animates his workmanship, is God, who formed man, and
  ‘breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.’

  Some writers have labored to prove that this Prometheus, of the
  heathen Mythology, was a Scriptural character. Bochart believes him to
  have been the same with Magog, mentioned in the book of Genesis.
  Prometheus was the son of Iapetus, and Magog was the son of Japhet,
  who, according to that learned writer, was identical with Iapetus. He
  says, that as Magog went to settle in Scythia, so did Prometheus; as
  Magog either invented, or improved, the art of founding metals, and
  forging iron, so, according to the heathen poets, did Prometheus.
  Diodorus Siculus asserts that Prometheus was the first to teach
  mankind how to produce fire from the flint and steel.

  The fable of Prometheus being devoured by an eagle, according to some,
  is founded on the name of Magog, which signifies ‘a man devoured by
  sorrow.’ Le Clerc, in his notes on Hesiod, says, that Epimetheus, the
  brother of Prometheus, was the same with the Gog of Scripture, the
  brother of Magog. Some writers, again, have exerted their ingenuity to
  prove that Prometheus is identical with the patriarch Noah.


FABLE III. [I.89-112]

  The formation of man is followed by a succession of the four ages of
  the world. The first is the Golden Age, during which Innocence and
  Justice alone govern the world.

The Golden Age was first founded, which, without any avenger, of its own
accord, without laws, practised both faith and rectitude. Punishment,
and the fear {of it}, did not exist, and threatening decrees were not
read upon the brazen {tables},[28] fixed up {to view}, nor {yet} did the
suppliant multitude dread the countenance of its judge; but {all} were
in safety without any avenger. The pine-tree, cut from its {native}
mountains, had not yet descended to the flowing waves, that it might
visit a foreign region; and mortals were acquainted with no shores
beyond their own. Not as yet did deep ditches surround the towns; no
trumpets of straightened, or clarions of crooked brass,[29] no helmets,
no swords {then} existed. Without occasion for soldiers, the minds {of
men}, free from care, enjoyed an easy tranquillity.

The Earth itself, too, in freedom, untouched by the harrow, and wounded
by no ploughshares, of its own accord produced everything; and men,
contented with the food created under no compulsion, gathered the fruit
of the arbute-tree, and the strawberries of the mountain, and cornels,
and blackberries adhering to the prickly bramble-bushes, and acorns
which had fallen from the wide-spreading tree of