# The Prose Edda (Norse Mythology)
Author: Snorri Sturluson
Category: 07_mitologia
Source: Gutenberg #33660
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:22:36.008552
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Greg Weeks, Roger L. Holda, Mary Meehan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









                      The Year When Stardust Fell

                       _A Science Fiction Novel_

                          By Raymond F. Jones

[Transcriber note: Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Jacket Design by James Heugh
Endpaper Design by Alex Schomburg

_Cecile Matschat, Editor
Carl Carmer, Consulting Editor_

THE JOHN C. WINSTON COMPANY
Philadelphia, Toronto

Copyright, 1958
By Raymond F. Jones

FIRST EDITION

_Made in the United States of America_

_To Laura Lee_




Contents


_Of Men of Science_

1. _The Comet_

2. _Breakdown_

3. _Power Failure_

4. _Disaster Spreads_

5. _Thief_

6. _The Scientist_

7. _Dust from the Stars_

8. _Attack_

9. _Judgment_

10. _Victory of the Dust_

11. _The Animals Are Sick_

12. _Decontamination_

13. _Stay Out of Town!_

14. _Mobilization_

15. _Battle_

16. _Black Victory_

17. _Balance of Nature_

18. _Witchcraft_

19. _Conquest of the Comet_

20. _Reconstruction_

_About the Author_




_Of Men of Science_


The story of man is the story--endlessly repeated--of a struggle:
between light and darkness, between knowledge and ignorance, between
good and evil, between men who would build and men who would destroy. It
is no more complicated than this.

That light, knowledge, good, and constructive men have had a small edge
in this struggle is attested to by our slow rise over the long millennia
of time. In taking stock of our successes, however, it is easy to assume
the victory has been won. Nothing could be further from the truth. This
is a contest that is never ended, nor can it be, as long as men are upon
the Earth.

While man has free choice, the elements of darkness, ignorance, evil and
destruction are available for him to choose, and there are times when
these seem the best alternatives.

At the end of the 18th century one of the greatest minds of all time was
destroyed by one stroke of a guillotine blade. The judge who presided at
the trial of the great French chemist Lavoisier is reported to have
said, "The Republic has no need of men of science."

Choices like this have often been made by the society of man. A turnoff
to darkness has been deliberately taken, superstition has been embraced
while knowledge has been destroyed.

When times are placid we assume such choices could result only from some
great insanity; that the men who made them had themselves known more
pleasant days. The truth is that there are extremes of circumstance
which could force almost any man to abandon that which he has always
held to be right and good, and only the very giants could stand up and
prove themselves unmoved.

Such giants may seem, in ordinary life, rather obscure. Illustrating
this are the people in this story: a somewhat pompous little mayor; a
professor of chemistry in a small-town college in the mountain west; a
minister of the gospel, who would be lost with a big-city congregation;
a sheriff who doesn't care what happens to him personally as long as he
sticks to the kind of rightness that has always worked; and a
high-school boy who learns what it means to do a man's work.

Such people are important, the most important people alive today. They
are the ones whose hands hold all that our culture has achieved when
catastrophe overtakes us.

The illusion of security is a vicious one. With physical comforts around
us, the abyss that is just beyond our walls is forgotten: the abyss of
outer space, beyond the paper-thin atmosphere shielding us; of the fires
in the earth beneath; of the hurricane winds beyond the horizon; of the
evil and insanity in the minds of many men.

The caveman dared not forget these abysses, nor the frontiersman, nor
the scientist who fought the witch hunters to bring forth a new truth of
Nature. But when we believe we are secure we do forget them.

In catastrophe, the most recent achievements of the race are the first
to go. When war comes, or mobs attack, or hurricanes strike, our science
and our arts are abandoned first. Necessity of survival seems to insist
that we cannot fool with things of the mind and of the soul when
destruction threatens the body. And so, "The Republic has no need of men
of science."

Emergency can take any form. Here is a story in which the mechanical
foundation of our culture is threatened. Whether the means of this
threat, as I have pictured it, could possibly occur, I do not know. I
know of no reason why it could not, if circumstances were right.

But more important, this is what happens to a small, college town caught
up in such disaster. How quickly do its people dispense with their men
of science and turn to superstition and mob rule for hope of survival?

It is perhaps not so apparent to those of us who have grown up with it,
but we have witnessed in our own time, under threat of calamity, the
decline of science before a blight of crash-priority engineering
technology. Today, we hear it faintly whispered, "The Republic has no
need of men of science."

Insofar as he represents the achievements of our race over the great
reaches of time, the scientist will always be needed if we are to retain
the foothold we have gained over Nature. The witch doctors and the
fortunetellers clamor for his niche and will gladly extend their
services if we wish to change our allegiance.

The story of THE YEAR WHEN STARDUST FELL is not a story of the distant
future or of the remote past. It is not a story of a never-never land
where fantastic happenings take place daily. It is a story of my town
and yours, of people like you and me and the mayor in townhall, his
sheriff on the corner, and the professor in the university--a story that
happens no later than tomorrow.

R. F. J.




Chapter 1. _The Comet_


The comet was the only thing in the whole sky. All the stars were
smothered by the light of its copper-yellow flame, and, although the sun
had set two hours ago, the Earth was lit as with the glow of a
thunderous dawn.

In Mayfield, Ken Maddox walked slowly along Main Street, avoiding
collisions with other people whose eyes were fixed on the object in the
sky. Ken had spent scores of hours observing the comet carefully, both
by naked eye and with his 12-inch reflecting telescope. Still he could
not keep from watching it as he picked his way along the street toward
the post office.

The comet had been approaching Earth for months, growing steadily to
bigger proportions in the sky, but tonight was a very special night, and
Mayfield was watching with increased awe and half-dread--as were
hundreds of thousands of other communities around the world.

Tonight, the Earth entered the comet's tail, and during the coming
winter would be swept continuously by its million-mile spread.

There was no visible change. The astronomers had cautioned that none was
to be expected. The Earth had passed through the tails of comets
before, although briefly, and none of the inhabitants had been
physically aware of the event.

This time there was a difference. As intangible as a mere suspicion, it
could yet be felt, and there was the expectancy of the unknown in the
air.

Ken prided himself on a scientific attitude, but it was hard not to
share the feelings of those around him that something momentous and
mysterious was taking place this night. There would be no quick passage
this time. Earth would lie within the tail for a period of over four
months as they both made their way about the sun.

Such close-lying orbits had never occurred before in the known history
of the world.

"It's frightening, isn't it?"

Ken was aware that he had stopped at the edge of a crowd in front of
Billings Drugstore, and beside him Maria Larsen was staring intently
upward as she spoke.

She was a small, blonde girl with intense blue eyes. Ken smiled
confidently and looked down at her. "No," he said. "It's a beautiful
thing. It's a kind of miracle that we should be alive when it happened.
No human beings have ever seen such a sight before."

Maria shivered faintly. "I wish I could feel that way. Do you think it
will get any bigger?"

"Yes. It will not reach its closest approach for over three months, yet.
Its approach is very slow so we won't notice much change."

"It is beautiful," Maria agreed slowly, "but, still, it's frightening.
I'll be glad when it's gone."

Ken laughed and tucked the girl's arm in his. There was something so
disturbingly serious about the Swedish girl, who was spending a year in
Mayfield with her parents. Her father, Dr. Larsen, was a visiting
professor of chemistry, engaged to teach this season at the State
Agricultural College in Mayfield. Ken's own father was head of the
chemistry department there.

"Come down to the post office with me to get some stamps," Ken said.
"Then I'll drive you home."

"It's closed. You can't get any stamps tonight."

"Maybe the boys in gray haven't been too busy watching the comet to
stock the stamp machine. Look out!" He pulled her back quickly as she
stepped from the curb. A wheezy car moved past, its driver completely
intent on his observation of the comet.

"Old Dad Martin's been trying to wrap that thing around a pole for 25
years," Ken said unhappily. "It looks like he's going to make it
tonight!"

Along the street, bystanders whistled at the aged driver, and
pedestrians yelled at one another to get out of the way. The car's
progress broke, for a moment, the sense of ominous concern that spread
over Main Street.

At the post office, Ken found Maria's prediction was right. The stamp
machine was empty.

"I have some at home," the girl said. "You're welcome to them."

"I need a lot. Mother's sending out some invitations."

"I'm sure I have enough. Papa says I'm supporting the postal department
with all the letters I write to everyone at home in Sweden."

"All right, I'll take you up on it. I'll get skinned if I don't get
them. I was supposed to pick them up this afternoon and I forgot all
about it."

"I thought I learned good English in the schools in Sweden," said Maria
wistfully, "but I don't seem to understand half what you say. This
'skinned'--what does that mean?"

"Nothing you need to worry about," Ken laughed. "If you would teach me
English the way you learned it, Miss Rymer would give me a lot better
marks in her class."

"Now I think you're making fun of me," said Maria.

"Not me. Believe me, I'm not! Hey, look what's coming down the street!
That's old Granny Wicks. I thought she had died a long time ago."

In front of the post office, an ancient white horse drew a light,
ramshackle wagon to a halt. From the seat, a small, wizened, old woman
looked at the crowd on the street. She dropped the reins in front of
her. Her eyes, set deeply in her wrinkled face, were bright and sharp as
a bird's, and moved with the same snapping motions.

From both sides of the street the bystanders watched her. Granny Wicks
was known to everyone in Mayfield. She was said to have been the first
white child born in the valley, almost a hundred years ago. At one time,
her horse and wagon were familiar, everyday sights on the streets, but
she seldom came to town any more.

Many people, like Ken, had had the vague impression that she was dead.

She appeared lively enough now as she scrambled down from the wagon seat
and moved across the sidewalk to the post office steps. She climbed
these and stood in front of the doors. Curiously, the crowd watched her.

"Listen to me, you!" she exclaimed suddenly. Her voice was high and
shrill, reminding Ken of an angry bird's. Maria looked at him
wonderingly, and he shrugged his shoulders.

"Don't ask me what she's up to. She's pulled some corkers in her time."

Granny Wicks looked over the gathering crowd. Then she pointed a bony
arm at the glowing comet. "You know what it means," she exclaimed
shrilly. "You feel it in your bones, and your hearts quiver with fear.
There's death in the sky, and an omen to all the inhabitants of the
Earth that destruction awaits men."

She stopped and glared. The laughter that had first greeted her gave
way to uneasiness as people glanced at their neighbors, then hastily at
the comet, and back to Granny Wicks. Some began moving away in
discomfort.

"You're scared to listen, eh?" Granny shrilled at them. "You're afraid
to know what's in store! Turn your backs then! Close your ears! You
can't change the signs in the heavens!"

A movement in the crowd caught Ken's eye. He saw the stout figure of
Sheriff Johnson moving toward the steps. The law officer stepped out in
front and approached Granny Wicks.

"Come on now, Granny," said Sheriff Johnson. "You wouldn't want to scare
folks out of a good night's sleep, would you?"

"You let me alone, Sam Johnson! I'm saying what I have to say, and
nobody's going to stop me. Listen to me, all of you! There's death in
Mayfield in the winter that's coming, and spring won't see one man in
ten left alive. Remember what I say. The stars have sent their
messenger...."

"Okay, Granny, let's go," said the Sheriff. "You've said your piece and
scared the daylights out of everybody. You'd better be getting on out to
your place before it gets dark. The comet won't light things up all
night. How's your supply of wood and coal for the winter, Granny? The
boys been getting it in for you?"

"I got plenty, Sam Johnson. More'n I'll need for this winter. Come
spring, I won't be around to be needing anything else from anybody.
Neither will you!"

The Sheriff watched as the old woman climbed to her wagon seat again.
Those standing nearby helped her gently. She took the reins and snapped
them at the weary horse.

"Take care of yourself, Granny!" someone called.

Sheriff Johnson stood silently on the steps until the wagon passed out
of sight around the corner of the block. Then he moved slowly by Ken and
Maria. He smiled grimly at Ken.

"It's bad enough to have that thing hanging up there in the sky without
that kind of talk." He glanced up for a moment. "It gives you the
willies. Sometimes I wonder, myself, if Granny isn't half-right."

There was a stillness in the street as the people slowly dispersed ahead
of the Sheriff. Voices were low, and the banter was gone. The yellow
light from the sky cast weird, bobbing shadows on the pavement and
against the buildings.

"Shall we go?" Maria asked. "This is giving me--what do you say?--the
creeps."

"It's crazy!" Ken exclaimed with a burst of feeling. "It shows what
ignorance of something new and strange can do. One feebleminded, old
woman can infect a whole crowd with her crazy superstitions, just
because they don't know any more about this thing than she does!"

"It's more than that," said Maria quietly. "It's the feeling that people
have always had about the world they find themselves in. It doesn't
matter how much you know about the ocean and the winds and the tides,
there is always a feeling of wonder and fear when you stand on the shore
and watch enormous waves pounding the rocks.

"Even if you know what makes the thunder and the lightning, you can't
watch a great storm without feeling very small and puny."

"Of course not," Ken said. "Astronomers feel all that when they look a
couple of billion light-years into space. Physicists know it when they
discover a new particle of matter. But _they_ don't go around muttering
about omens and signs. You can feel the strength of natural forces
without being scared to death.

"Maybe that's what marks the only real difference between witches and
scientists, after all! The first scientist was the guy who saw fire come
down from the sky and decided that was the answer to some of his
problems. The witch doctor was too scared of both the problem and the
answer to believe the problem could ever have a solution. So he
manufactured delusions to make himself and others think the problem
would just quietly go away. There are a lot of witch doctors still
operating and they're not all as easy to recognize as Granny Wicks!"

They reached Ken's car, and he held the door open for Maria. As he
climbed in his own side he said, "How about coming over to my place and
having a look at the comet through my telescope? You'll see something
really awe-inspiring then."

"I'd love to. Right now?"

"Sure." Ken started the car and swung away from the curb, keeping a
careful eye on the road, watching for any others like Dad Martin.

"Sometimes I think there will be a great many things I'll miss when we
go back to Sweden," Maria said thoughtfully, as she settled back in the
seat, enjoying the smooth, powerful ride of Ken's souped-up car.

Ken shot a quick glance at her. He felt a sudden sense of loss, as if he
had not realized before that their acquaintance was strictly temporary.
"I guess a lot of people here will miss the Larsens, too," he said
quietly. "What will you miss most of all?"

"The bigness of everything," said Maria. "The hundreds and hundreds of
miles of open country. The schoolboys with cars to cover the distance.
At home, a grown man is fortunate to have one. Papa had a very hard time
owning one."

"Why don't you persuade him to stay here? Mayfield's a darn good place
to live."

"I've tried already, but he says that when a man is grown he has too
many things to hold him to the place he's always known. He has promised,
however, to let me come back if I want to, after I finish the university
at home."

"That would be nice." Ken turned away, keeping his eyes intently on the
road. There was nothing else he could say.

He drove slowly up the long grade of College Avenue. His family lived in
an older house a block below the brow of College Hill. It gave a
pleasant view of the entire expanse of the valley in which Mayfield was
situated. The houses of the town ranged themselves in neat, orderly rows
below, and spread out on the other side of the business section. In the
distance, north and south, were the small farms where hay and dairy
stock and truck crops had been raised since pioneer times.

"I'll miss this, too," said Maria. "It's beautiful."

Ken wasn't listening to her, however. The car had begun to sputter
painfully as it took the curve leading off the avenue to Linwood Street
where Ken lived. He glanced at the heat indicator. The needle was almost
at the boiling point.

"For Pete's sake! The water must have leaked out of the radiator."

Ken pulled the car to the curb in front of the house and got out,
leaving the engine idling. He raised the hood and cautiously turned the
radiator cap with his handkerchief. A cloud of steam shot out, but when
he lifted the cap the water was not quite boiling, and there was plenty
of it.

Maria came up beside him. "Is something wrong?"

"You've got me there. The radiator's clean. The pump isn't more than two
months old. I checked the timing last Saturday. Something's gone sour to
make her heat up like that."

From across the street, his neighbor, Mr. Wilkins, approached with a
grin. "Looks like the same thing hit us both. Mine started boiling as I
came up the hill tonight. It's got me stumped."

"The circulation must be clogged," said Ken. "Either that or the timing
has slipped off. That's all it could be."

"Those were my ideas, too. Both wrong in my case. Let me know if you get
any other bright ones." He moved off with a pleasant wave of his hand.

"It will cool," said Ken to Maria. "By the time you're ready to leave
I'll be able to drive you home."

"I wouldn't want you to damage your car. I can walk."

"We'll see."

He led her around the house. In the center of the backyard loomed the
high, round dome of his amateur observatory. It was Ken's personal
pride, as well as that of the members of the Mayfield High Science Club,
who had helped build the shell and the mountings. The club used it every
Thursday night when the seeing was good.

Ken had ground the precision mirror alone. He had ground his first one,
a 4-inch glass, when he was a Boy Scout. Three years later he had
tackled the tremendous job of producing a 12-inch one. Professor Douglas
of the physics department at the college had pronounced it perfect.

Ken opened the door and switched on the light inside the dome. "Don't
mind the mess," he said. "I've been taking photographs of the comet for
the last month."

To Maria, who was used to the clutter of a laboratory, there was no
mess. She admired the beauty of the instrument Ken and his friends had
built. "Our university telescope isn't any better," she said.

"You can't tell by the plumbing," Ken laughed. "Better take a look at
the image before you pass judgment."

Skilfully, he swung the long tube around to the direction of the comet.
With the fine controls he centered the cross hairs of the eyepiece on
the blazing object in the sky.

"It's moving too fast to stay in range very long," he said.

Maria stepped to the observer's position. She gasped suddenly at the
image of the fiery monster hovering in the sky. Viewing the comet along
the axis of the tail, as the Earth lay at the edge of it, an observer's
vision was like that of a miniature, flaming sun with an offcenter halo
of pulsing, golden light.

To Maria, the comet seemed like something living. Slow, almost
imperceptible ripples in the glowing scarves of light made them sway as
if before some mighty, cosmic wind in space.

"It's beautiful," Maria murmured, "but it's terrible, too. No wonder the
ancients believed comets brought evil and death upon the Earth. I could
almost believe it, myself!"




Chapter 2. _Breakdown_


Ken Maddox could not remember a time when he had not wanted to become a
scientist. Maybe it started when his father first invited him to look
through a microscope. That was when he was a very small boy, but he
could still remember the revelation of that experience. He remembered
how it had seemed, on looking away from the lens, that the whole world
of normal vision was only a fragment of that which was hidden behind
curtains and shrouds and locked doors. Only men, like his father, with
special instruments and wisdom and knowledge, could ever hope to
understand the world of the unknown, which the ordinary person did not
even suspect.

Now, at sixteen, Ken was tall, with black hair that had an annoying curl
to it. He was husky enough to be the main asset of the football squad of
Mayfield High School in his senior year. He knew exactly where he was
going and what he was going to do. He would be one of those men who
lived beyond the mere surface of the world, and who would seek to
understand its deep and hidden meanings.

Ken thought of this as he watched Maria at the telescope. What a
difference between knowing the comet as this instrument showed it, and
with the knowledge revealed by modern astronomy, and knowing it as the
average person in Mayfield did.

Ken and Maria stayed in the observatory until the comet had almost
disappeared below the horizon. Mrs. Maddox brought a snack of sandwiches
and punch.

"I always do this when I see the observatory dome open," she said,
smiling. "I never know when Ken's going to quit his stargazing and come
in for the night."

"We're about through, Mom. I'll drive Maria over to her place and be
back in a little while."

"I'm going to loan him the stamps," Maria said.

Mrs. Maddox looked at Ken in mock severity. "You mean you forgot
_again_?"

"No--I remembered," Ken said lamely. "After the post office closed, that
is. Anyhow, Maria has plenty."

"Well," said Mrs. Maddox, "I know who's going to have to mail my
invitations if they're ever to get out in time for the party!"

After he and Maria had finished the snack, Ken started his car again.
The engine had cooled to normal temperature, but he watched the
indicator closely as he drove. Nothing seemed right about the action of
the car. The engine had turned over sluggishly when he pressed the
starter button, as if the battery were almost dead. Now it lugged
heavily, even when going downhill.

"The whole thing's haywire," Ken said irritably. "It acts like the
crankcase is full of sand or something."

"Let me walk the rest of the way," said Maria. "You take the car back,
and I'll bring the stamps over on my way to school in the morning."

"No, we're almost there. Nothing much more could go wrong than already
has."

When they reached Maria's place they found Professor and Mrs. Larsen
sitting on the porch.

"We've been watching the comet," Maria said excitedly. "Ken let me look
at it through his telescope."

"A remarkable event," said Professor Larsen. "I feel very fortunate to
be alive to witness it. My generation hasn't had this kind of privilege
before. I was a child when Halley's comet appeared."

"I've been trying to tell Maria what a lucky break this is, but she
agrees with Granny Wicks," said Ken.

"Oh, I do not!" Maria snapped.

"Granny Wicks?" Professor Larsen inquired. "Your grandmother?"

"No." Ken tried to cover the professor's lack of familiarity with
American idioms. "She's just the town's oldest citizen. Everybody likes
her and calls her Granny, but her mind belongs to the Middle Ages."

"You hear that, Papa?" cried Maria. "Her mind belongs to the Middle
Ages, and he says I'm like Granny Wicks!"

Maria's mother laughed gently. "I'm sure Ken didn't mean your mind is of
the Middle Ages, too, dear."

Ken flushed. "Of course not. What I mean is that Granny Wicks thinks the
comet is something mysterious and full of omens, and Maria says she sort
of thinks the same about it."

"I didn't say anything about omens and signs!"

"Well, except for that...."

"Except for that, I suppose we are all in agreement," said Professor
Larsen slowly. He drew on his pipe and it glowed brightly in the
darkness. "The whole universe is a terrible place that barely tolerates
living organisms. Almost without exception it is filled with great suns
that are flaming, atomic furnaces, or dead cinders of planets to which a
scrap of poisonous atmosphere may cling. Yes, it is indeed a great
miracle that here in this corner of the universe conditions exist where
living things have found a foothold. We may be glad that this is so, but
it does not pay man to ever forget the fierceness of the home in which
he lives. Earth is merely one room of that home, on the pleasant, sunny
side of the house. But the whole universe is his home."

"That's the thing I've been trying to say," Ken answered. "We can know
this without being afraid."

Maria's father nodded. "Yes. Fear is of no use to anyone. Awe, respect,
admiration, wonder, humility--these are all necessary. But not fear."

Maria turned from the group. "I'll bring the stamps, Ken," she said.

"Won't you come in and have some cake?" Mrs. Larsen asked.

"No, thanks. Mother fed us before we left my place. I'm afraid I
couldn't eat any more."

In a moment Maria was back. "Here are two whole sheets," she said. "I
hope that will be enough."

"Plenty. I'll see you get repaid tomorrow. Good night, everybody."

"Good night, Ken."

He moved down the walk toward his car and got in. When he pressed die
starter button the engine groaned for a few seconds and came to a
complete stop. He tried again; there was only a momentary, protesting
grind.

Ken got out and raised the hood and leaned over the engine in disgusted
contemplation. There was no visible clue to the cause of the trouble.

"Is your battery dead?" Professor Larsen called.

"No. It's something else." Ken slammed the hood harder than he had
intended. "I'll have to leave it here overnight and pick it up in the
morning."

"I can push you home with my car, or at least give you a ride."

"No, please don't bother," Ken said. "I'll tow it home with Dad's car
tomorrow. I'd just as soon walk, now. It's only a few blocks."

"As you wish. Good night, Ken."

"Good night, Professor."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ken's clock radio woke him the next morning. He reached over to shut off
the newscast it carried. There was only one item any commentator talked
about now, the comet. Ken wondered how they could get away with a
repetition of the same thing, over and over, but they seemed able to get
an audience as long as they kept the proper tone of semi-hysteria in
their voices.

As his hand touched the dial to switch it off, something new caught
Ken's attention. "A curious story is coming in from all parts of the
country this morning," the announcer said. "Auto mechanics are reporting
a sudden, unusually brisk business. No one knows the reason, but there
seems to be a virtual epidemic of car breakdowns. Some garagemen are
said to be blaming new additives in gasoline and lubricating oil. It is
reported that one major oil company is undertaking an investigation of
these charges, but, in the meantime, no one really seems to have a good
answer.

"In connection with the comet, however, from widely scattered areas
comes the report that people are even blaming these engine failures on
our poor, old comet. In the Middle Ages they blamed comets for
everything from soured cream to fallen kingdoms. Maybe this modern age
isn't so different, after all. At any rate, this comet will no doubt be
happy to get back into open space, where there are no Earthmen to blame
it for all their accidents and shortcomings!"

Ken switched off the radio and lay back on the pillow. That was a real
choice one--blaming the comet for car breakdowns! Page Granny Wicks!

The breakdowns were curious, however. There was no good reason why there
should be a sudden rash of them. He wondered if they had actually
occurred, or if the story was just the work of some reporter trying to
make something out of his own inability to get into a couple of garages
that were swamped by the usual weekend rush. This was most likely the
case.

However it didn't explain why his own car had suddenly conked out, Ken
thought irritably. He'd have to get it over to Art Matthews' garage as
soon as school was out.

At school that morning there was little talk of anything but the comet.
After physics class, Ken was met by Joe Walton and three other members
of the science club, of which Ken was president.

"We want a special meeting," said Joe. "We've just had the most
brilliant brainstorm of our brief careers."

"It had better be more brilliant than the last one," said Ken. "That
drained the club treasury of its last peso."

"I was watching the comet last night, and I began to smell the dust of
its tail as the Earth moved into it...."

"You must have been smelling something a lot more powerful than comet
dust."

"I said to myself--why don't we collect some of that stuff and bottle it
and see what it's made of? What do you think?" Joe asked eagerly.

Ken scowled. "Just how many molecules of material from the comet's tail
do you think there are in the atmosphere over Mayfield right now?"

"How do I know? Six--maybe eight."

Ken laughed. "You're crazy, anyway. What have you got in mind?"

"I'm not sure," Joe answered seriously. "We know the comet's tail is so
rarefied that it resembles a pretty fair vacuum, but it _is_ composed of
something. As it mixes with the atmosphere we ought to be able to
determine the changing makeup of the air and get a pretty good idea of
the composition of the comet's tail. This is a chance nobody's ever had
before--and maybe never will again, until we go right out there in
spaceships--being right inside a comet's tail long enough to analyze
it!"

"It sounds like a terrific project," Ken admitted. "The universities
will all be doing it, of course, but it would still be a neat trick if
we could bring it off. Maybe Dad and Professor Larsen will have ideas on
how we could do it."

"We ought to be able to make most of the equipment," said Joe, "so it
shouldn't be too expensive. Anyway, we'll have a meeting then, right
after school?"

"Yes--no, wait. The engine in my car conked out. I've got to go over to
Art's with it this afternoon. You go ahead without me. Kick the idea
around and let me know what's decided. I'll go along with anything short
of mortgaging the football field."

"Okay," said Joe. "I don't see why you don't just sell that hunk of junk
and get a real automobile. You've got a good excuse now. This breakdown
is a good omen!"

"Don't talk to me about omens!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Art Matthews had the best equipped garage in town, and was a sort of
unofficial godfather to all the hot-rodders in the county. He helped
them plane the heads of their cars. He got their special cams and
carburetor and manifold assemblies wholesale, and he gave them fatherly
advice about using their heads when they were behind the wheel.

Ken called him at noon. "I've got troubles, Art," he said. "Can I bring
the car over after school?"

"I'm afraid I can't do a thing for you today," Art Matthews said. "I
don't know what's happened, but I've had tow calls all day. Right now
the shop is full and they're stacked four-high outside. I'm going to do
a couple of highway patrol cars and Doc Adams'. I figured they ought to
have priority."

Ken felt a sudden, uneasy sense of recognition. This was the same kind
of thing he had heard about on the radio that morning! A rash of car
breakdowns all over the country. Now, the same thing in Mayfield!

"What's wrong with them?" he asked the mechanic. "Why is everybody
coming in with trouble at the same time?"

"They're not coming in," said Art. "I'm having to go out after them. I
don't know yet what's wrong. They heat up and stall. It's the craziest
thing I've run into in 30 years of garage work."

"Mine acted the same way," Ken said.

"Yeah? Well, you're in good company. Listen, why don't you and maybe Joe
and Al come down and give me a hand after school? I'll never get on top
here without some help. After we get these police and other priority
cars out of the way, maybe we can get a quick look at what's wrong with
yours."

"It's a deal."

Joe Walton wasn't much in favor of spending that afternoon and an
unknown number of others in Art's garage; he was too overwhelmed by the
idea of analyzing the material of the comet's tail. However Art had done
all of them too many favors in the past to ignore his call for help.

"The trouble with this town," Joe said, "is that three-fourths of the
so-called automobiles running around the streets belong down at
Thompson's Auto Wrecking."

Al Miner agreed to come, too. When they reached the garage after school
they saw Art had not been exaggerating. His place was surrounded by
stalled cars, and the street outside was lined with them in both
directions. Ken borrowed the tow truck and brought his own car back from
the Larsens'. By that time the other two boys were at work.

"Batteries are all okay," Art told him. "Some of these engines will turn
over, but most of them won't budge. I've jerked a couple of heads, but
I can't see anything. I want you to take the pans off and take down the
bearings to see if they're frozen. That's what they act like. When
that's done, we'll take it from there."

Ken hoisted the front end of one of the police cars and slid under it on
a creeper. Art's electric impact wrenches were all in use, so he began
the laborious removal of the pan bolts by hand. He had scarcely started
when he heard a yell from Joe who was beneath the other police car.

"What's the matter?" Art called.

"Come here! Look at this!"

The others crowded around, peering under the car. Joe banged and pried
at one of the bearings, still clinging to the crankshaft after the cap
had been removed.

"Don't do that!" Art shouted at him. "You'll jimmy up the crankshaft!"

"Mr. Matthews," Joe said solemnly, "this here crankshaft has been
jimmied up just as much as it's ever going to get jimmied. These
bearings are welded solid. They'll have to be machined off!"

"Nothing could freeze them to the shaft that hard," Art exclaimed.

Joe moved out of the way. Art crawled under and tapped the bearing. He
pried at it with a chisel. Then he applied a cold chisel and pounded.
The bearing metal came away chip by chip, but the bulk of it clung to
the shaft as if welded.

"I've never seen anything like that before in my life!" Art came out
from beneath the car.

"What do you think could cause it?" Joe asked.

"Gas!" said Art vehemently. "The awful gas they're putting out these
days. They put everything into it except sulphur and molasses, and they
expect an engine to run. Additives, they call 'em! Detergents! Why can't
they sell us plain old gasoline?"

Ken watched from a distance behind the group. He looked at the silent,
motionless cars in uneasy speculation. He recalled again the radio
announcement of that morning. Maybe it _could_ be something they were
adding to the gas or oil, as Art said. It couldn't, however, happen so
suddenly--not all over the country. Not in New York, Montgomery,
Alabama, San Francisco, and Mayfield. Not all at the same time.

Art turned up the shop lights. Outside, as the sun lowered in the sky,
the glow of the comet began turning the landscape a copper-yellow hue.
Its light came through the broad doors of the garage and spread over the
half-dismantled cars.

"All right, let's go," said Art. His voice held a kind of false
cheeriness, as if something far beyond his comprehension had passed
before him and he was at a loss to meet it or even understand it.

"Let's go," he said again. "Loosen all those connecting rods and get the
shafts out. We'll see what happens when we try to pull the pistons."




Chapter 3. _Power Failure_


The news broadcasts the following morning were less hysterical than
previously. Because the news itself was far more serious, the announcers
found it unnecessary to inject artificial notes of urgency.

Ken listened to his bedside radio as he watched the first tint of dawn
above the hills east of the valley. "The flurry of mechanical failures,
which was reported yesterday, has reached alarming proportions," the
announcer said. "During the past 24 hours garages in every section of
the nation have been flooded with calls. From the other side of the
Atlantic reports indicate the existence of a similar situation in Europe
and in the British Isles.

"Automobile breakdowns are not the most serious accidents that are
taking place. Other forms of machinery are also being affected. A crack
train of the Southern Pacific came to a halt last night in the Arizona
desert. All efforts of the crew to repair the stalled engine were
fruitless. A new one had to be brought up in order for the passengers to
continue on their way early this morning.

"From Las Vegas comes word that one of the huge generators at Hoover Dam
has been taken out of service because of mechanical failure. Three other
large municipalities have had similar service interruptions. These are
Rochester, New York, Clinton, Missouri, and Bakersfield, California.

"Attempts have been made to find some authoritative comment on the
situation from scientists and Government officials. So far, no one has
been willing to commit himself to an opinion as to the cause of this
unexplained and dangerously growing phenomenon.

"Yesterday it was jokingly whispered that the comet was responsible.
Today, although no authority can be found to verify it, the rumor
persists that leading scientists are seriously considering the
possibility that the comet may actually have something to do with the
breakdowns."

Ken turned off the radio and lay back with his hands beneath his head,
staring at the ceiling. His first impulse was to ridicule again this
fantastic idea about the comet. Yet, there had to be _some_ explanation.

He had seen enough of the engines in Art's garage last night to know
they had suffered no ordinary mechanical disorder. Something had
happened to them that had never happened to engines before, as far as he
knew. The crankshafts were immovable in their bearings. The pistons had
been frozen tight in the cylinders when they tried to remove some of
them. Every moving part was welded to its mating piece as solidly as if
the whole engine had been heated to the very edge of melting and then
allowed to cool.

Apparently something similar was happening to engines in every part of
the world. It could only mean that some common factor was at work in
London, and Paris, and Cairo, and Mayfield. The only such factor newly
invading the environment of every city on the globe was the comet.

It would almost require a belief in witchcraft to admit the comet might
be responsible!

Ken arose and dressed slowly. By the time he was finished he heard his
father's call to breakfast from downstairs.

Professor Maddox was already seated when Ken entered the dining room. He
was a tall, spare man with an appearance of intense absorption in
everything about him.

He glanced up and nodded a pleasant good morning as Ken approached. "I
hear you worked overtime as an auto mechanic last night," he said.
"Isn't that a bit rough, along with the load you're carrying at school?"

"Art asked us to do him a favor. Haven't you seen what's been happening
around town?"

"I noticed an unusual number of cars around the garage, and I wondered
about it. Has everyone decided to take care of their winter repairs at
the same time?"

"Haven't you heard the radio, either, Dad?"

"No. I've been working on my new paper for the _Chemical Journal_ until
midnight for the last week. What has the radio got to do with your work
as a mechanic?"

Quickly, Ken outlined to his father the events he had heard reported the
past two days. "It's not only automobiles, but trains, power plants,
ships, everything--"

Professor Maddox looked as if he could scarcely believe Ken was not
joking. "That would certainly be a strange set of coincidences," he said
finally, "provided the reports are true, of course."

"It's true, all right," said Ken. "It's not a matter of coincidence.
Something is causing it to happen!"

"What could that possibly be?"

"There's talk about the comet having something to do with it."

Professor Maddox almost choked on his spoonful of cereal. "Ken," he
laughed finally, "I thought you were such a stickler for rigid,
scientific methods and hypotheses! What's happened to all your rigor?"

Ken looked down at the tablecloth. "I know it sounds ridiculous, like
something out of the dim past, when they blamed comets for corns, and
broken legs, and lost battles. Maybe this time it isn't so crazy when
you stop to think about it, and it's absolutely the only new factor
which could have some worldwide effect."

"How could it have any effect at all--worldwide or otherwise?" Professor
Maddox demanded.

"The whole world is immersed in its tail."

"And that tail is so tenuous that our senses do not even detect the
fact!"

"That doesn't mean it couldn't have some kind of effect."

"Such as stopping engines? Well, you're a pretty good mechanic. Just
what did the comet do to all these stalled pieces of machinery?"

Ken felt his father was being unfair, yet he could scarcely blame him
for not taking the hypothesis seriously. "I don't know what the comet
did--or could do--" he said in a low voice. "I just know I've never seen
any engines like those we took apart last night."

In detail, he described to his father the appearance of the engine parts
they had dismantled. "I brought home some samples of metal we cut from
the engine blocks with a torch. Would you take them up to the laboratory
at the college and have them examined under the electron microscope?"

"I wouldn't have time to run any such tests for several days. If you are
intent on pursuing this thing, however, I'll tell you what I'll do. You
and your science club friends can come up and use the equipment
yourselves."

"We don't know how!"

"I'll arrange for one of the teaching fellows to show you how to prepare
metallic samples and operate the electron microscope."

Ken's eyes lighted. "Gee, that would be great if you would do that, Dad!
Will you, really?"

"Come around after school today. I'll see that someone is there to help
you."

Art Matthews was disappointed when Ken called and said none of the
science club members would be around that afternoon. He couldn't keep
from showing in his voice that he felt they were letting him down.

"It's not any use trying to get those engines running," Ken said. "The
pistons would never come out of most of them without being drilled out.
We're not equipped for that. Even if we got things loosened up and
running again, what would keep the same thing from happening again?
That's what we've got to find out."

Art was unable to accept this point of view. He held a bewildered but
insistent belief that something ought to be done about the mounting pile
of disabled cars outside his garage. "We can get some of them going,
Ken. You fellows have got to lend a hand. I can't tackle it without
help."

"I'm sorry," Ken said. "We're convinced there's got to be another way to
get at the problem."

"All right. You guys do whatever you figure you've got to do. I can
probably round up some other help."

Ken hung up, wishing he had been able to make Art understand, but the
mechanic would probably be the last person in Mayfield to accept that
the comet could have any possible connection with the frozen engines.

As Ken walked to school that morning he estimated that at least 25
percent of the cars in Mayfield must be out of commission. Some of the
men in his neighborhood were in their driveways futilely punching their
starters while their engines moaned protestingly or refused to turn over
at all. Others were peering under the hoods, shaking their heads, and
calling across the yards to their neighbors.

In the street, some cars were lugging with great difficulty, but others
moved swiftly along without any evidence of trouble. Ken wondered how
there could be such a difference, and if some might prove immune, so to
speak, to the effect.

He had called a meeting of the club in the chemistry laboratory for an
hour before the first class. All of the members were there when he
arrived.

Ken called the meeting to order at once. "I guess you've all heard the
news broadcasts, and you know what's happening here in town," he said.
"Yesterday you talked about the possibility of collecting samples and
analyzing the material of the comet's tail. I don't know what you
decided. You can fill me in later on that. The problem is a lot more
important now than it was yesterday.

"It's beginning to seem as if the presence of the comet may actually be
responsible for the wave of mechanical failures. Finding out how and why
is just about the biggest problem in the whole world right now."

A babble of exclamations and protests arose immediately from the other
members of the group. Al Miner and Dave Whitaker were on their feet. Ted
Watkins waved a hand and shouted, "Don't tell us you're swallowing that
superstitious junk!"

Ken held up a hand. "One at a time. We haven't got all day, and there's
a lot of ground to cover. Ted, what's your comment?"

"My comment is that anybody's got a screw loose if he believes the
comet's got anything to do with all those cars being in Art's garage.
That stuff went out of fashion after the days of old Salem."

Several of the others nodded vigorously as Ted spoke.

"I guess we do need to bring some of you up to date on the background
material," said Ken. "Joe, tell them what we found last night."

Briefly, Joe Walton described the engines they had dismantled.
"Something had happened to them," he said, "which had never happened to
an engine since Ford drove his first horseless carriage down Main
Street."

"It doesn't mean anything!" exclaimed Ted. "No matter what it is, we
haven't any basis for tying it to the comet."

"Can you name any other universal factor that could account for it?" Ken
asked. "We have an effect that appears suddenly in Mayfield, Chicago,
Paris, and Cairo. Some people say it's the additives in gasoline, but
you don't get them showing up simultaneously in all parts of the world.
There is no other factor common to every locality where the mechanical
failures have occurred, except the comet.

"So I called this meeting to suggest that we expand our project beyond
anything we previously had in mind. I suggest we try to determine the
exact relationship between the breakdowns and the appearance of the
comet."

Big Dave Whitaker, sitting at the edge of the room, rose slowly in his
seat. "You've got the cart before the horse," he said. "You've got a
nice theory all set up and you want us to beat our brains out trying to
prove it. Now, take me. I've got a theory that little green men from
Mars have landed and are being sucked into the air intake of the
engines. Prove my theory first, why don't you?"

Ken grinned good-naturedly. "I stand corrected, but I won't back down
very far. I won't suggest we try to prove the connection with the comet,
but I do propose to set up some experiments to disc