# Introduction to the Study of the Kabalah
Author: W.W. Westcott
Category: 03_kabbalah
Source: Gutenberg #2494
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:18:52.337324
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

The Project Gutenberg Etext of For Greater Things: The story of Saint
Stanislaus Kostka by William T. Kane, S.J.


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


For Greater Things: The story of Saint Stanislaus Kostka

by William T. Kane, S.J.

February, 2001  [Etext #2494]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of For Greater Things: The story of Saint
Stanislaus Kostka by William T. Kane, S.J.
******This file should be named 2494.txt or 2494.zip******


This etext was prepared by Mike Loos, Glendale, AZ (mike.loos@hand.com)

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp metalab.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 etext00 and etext01
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

We are planning on making some changes in our donation structure
in 2000, so you might want to email me, hart@pobox.com beforehand.




*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*







FOR GREATER THINGS
The story of Saint Stanislaus Kostka

by William T. Kane, S.J.
with a preface by James J. Daly, S.J.


PREFACE

Among Christian evidences the heroic virtue and holiness of Catholic
youth must not be overlooked. Juvenile and adolescent victories of a
conspicuous kind, over the flesh, the world, and the devil, can be
found in no land and in no age, except a Christian land and age, and
in no Church except the Catholic Church.  It is of all excellences
the very rarest and most difficult, this triumphant mastery over
human weakness and human pride.  It has defied the life-long
strivings of men whom the world recognizes as beings of superior
wisdom and power of will. The philosophers who have described it
most beautifully and encouraged its pursuit in the most glowing and
impressive terms remain themselves sad examples of human futility in
the struggle to disengage the spirit from the claws of dragging and
unclean influences.  For the forces of evil are infinite in their
variety, insidious beyond the ability of natural sharpness to detect
and guard against, and unsleeping in the pressure of their siege
upon the heart of man. Who will explain how it comes to pass that
youth, whose callowness and inexperience are the mockery of the
world, has laid prostrate in single combat this giant of evil and
won fields where the reputations of the world's wisest and noblest
and most tried lie buried?

It is a matter of idle curiosity with us how an unbelieving
generation, ingenious in devising natural explanations (which are
most unnatural) of supernatural phenomena, would explain away the
wonder of the young Saint's life which is the subject of the
following pages. It presents to us a picture of Divine Condescension
guiding and inspiring and aiding human effort, so convincingly clear
and transparent in its smallest details and in its general effect as
to seem outside the pale of all possible mutilation and
misinterpretation by malice or skeptical analysis. Natural reaction
against sinful excess, thwarted ambitions, disappointed hopes, meek
conformity with environment, ecclesiastical manipulation of pliant
material, tame acquiescence in family traditions and arrangements,
these and all the other stock "explanations," with which a groveling
world seeks to pull down the Saints to its own dreary level, cannot
be invoked to dissipate the mystery and the glory surrounding
Stanislaus. How did he come so early in life, and in a nobleman's
family, to set such store upon spiritual values?  How did his tender
and immature mind grasp with such swift sureness the one lesson of
all philosophies, that life on its material side is an incident
rather than the sum of human existence and can never satisfy
the soul's desires ? How could this mere boy have developed, so
young, an iron will which wrought that hardest of all laborious
tasks, namely, the conformation of conduct with lofty ideals?  There
are supernatural answers to these and similar questions which might
be raised concerning the brief career of St. Stanislaus. We know of
no merely natural answers.

The lively and energetic style adopted in the present biography may
create a trace of mild surprise in older readers.  Sanctity, it is
true, some one may say, is a very beautiful achievement in a world
of poor and, at best, mediocre performance; but, after all, the
business of sanctity is a serious business. It calls for grit and
endurance, and, as a picture, is only saved from the sordid by
spiritual motives which are unseen.  If all moral life is a
monotonous warfare, the life of a Saint is warfare in the very first
ranks where the trenches are filled with water and the shells fall
thickest and the general discomfort and pettiness are at their
maximum. It is misleading and not in strict accord with known
realities, to paint the portrait of a Saint in rose color and
sunlight, diffusing an iridescent atmosphere of cheerful gayety and
buoyancy.

The criticism is not without some foundation; but youthful readers
will not adopt it. For youth is generous, and age is crabbed. And
because Saints never become crabbed we are right in concluding that
they always remain youthful.  And, to draw out our conclusion, the
lives of Saints, contrary to the popular belief, are much more
interesting to the child than they are to the man. It is a pity that
Catholic parents do not recognize this outstanding truth.  No
Saint's life is dull to the average intelligent child.  Grown-ups
are dull: they never yield to sublime impulses: they measure,
calculate, practice a hard-and-fast moderation, reduce the splendid
possibilities of life to a drab level of safe actuality, and pursue
ideals at a canny and cautious pace.  Not so the Saints. They always
retained the freshness and confidence and generous impulses of
childhood.  If God spoke to their inner ear and bade them leap
boldly forth into His Infinite Arms, spurning irretrievably the
solid footing of our spinning globe, without hesitation or question
they took the leap.  And every child can see the wisdom of it. To
the child it is common sense: to his elders it is inspired heroism
or unintelligible hardihood.  We have always entertained a deep-
seated suspicion that there is no child who does not think it easy
to be a Saint, so native is sanctity to Catholic childhood. Cardinal
Newman, we believe, exhorted us all to make our sacrifices for God
while we are young before the calculating selfishness of old age
gets hold of us.

Still it may not be quite clear to the inquiring mind why the
desperate difficulties of sainthood can be truthfully viewed in the
light of a breathless adventure.  Learn, then, the great secret. The
love of God in the heart is the magical light which touches the
dreariness and hardship of self-thwarting with a splendor of sublime
Romance. You cannot have holiness without love.  Holiness can be
either greater nor less than the love of God.  Let this love faint
or grow cold, there is at once a loss of holiness, even though it
retain all its external gear.  This is a cardinal truth; it is a key
which will solve many a puzzle.  It will explain why fanatics and
similar oddities are not Saints, though secular history sometimes
honors them with the title.

Merely concede that the Saint possesses love for God in an
extraordinary measure and degree, and it is the most comprehensible
thing in the world that he will not only accept all tests of his
love readily, but will go forth in search of them with eager
alacrity. First and last and always the only keen satisfaction of
great love, whether human or divine, is to welcome opportunities of
proving itself in some heroic form of courage and endurance. Danger,
suffering, battling against odds, discouragement, overwork, pain of
mind and body, failure, want of recognition, rebuffs, contempt and
persecution, are no longer the subject matter of a strong-jawed
stoicism or a submissive patience but rather the quickening bread
and wine of an intense and high-keyed life.  This is why the Saints,
be the provocation ever so great, never develop nerves, or
experience those melancholy and humiliating reactions which are the
natural ebb-tide of spiritual energies. This is why Saints can fast
and keep their temper sweet, can wear hair-shirts without
cultivating wry faces, can be passed by in the distribution of
honors without being soured, can pray all night without robbing the
day of its due meed of cheerfulness, can rise superior to frailties
and weaknesses without despising those who cannot, can be serious
without being testy and morose, can live for years in a cell or a
desert or a convent-close without perishing of ennui or being
devoured by restlessness, and can mingle with life, where all its
currents meet, without losing their heads or swerving a hairbreadth
from the straight line of a most uncommon and most impressive kind
of common sense.

Unless we keep before our eyes this mainspring of a Saint's life,
that life will be as enigmatical to us as it is to the world.  Jesus
balked at no test of the love which He bore towards us: nay, He
devised tests passing all human imagining. Let Him make trial of our
love for Him! We are unhappy till He does! And with this daring
spirit in his heart every Saint enters upon a career of Romance in
its sweetest and highest form. And, we submit, to recur to the
literary style of the following biography, Romance is light-hearted,
light-stepping, cheerful, with the starlight on its face and in its
eyes.

James J. Daly, S.J.


CONTENTS

Chapter I      ON THE ROAD
Chapter II     THE PURSUIT
Chapter III    EARLY DAYS
Chapter IV     OFF TO VIENNA
Chapter V      SCHOOL DAYS
Chapter VI     IN THE HOUSE OF KIMBERKER
Chapter VII    THE TEST OF COURAGE
Chapter VIII   IN DANGER OF DEATH
Chapter IX     VOCATION
Chapter X      THE RUNAWAY
Chapter XI     AT DILLIGEN
Chapter XII    THE ROAD TO ROME
Chapter XIII   THE NOVICESHIP
Chapter XIV    GOING HOME
Chapter XV     AFTERMATH


FOR GREATER THINGS

CHAPTER I

ON THE ROAD

Mid-August in Vienna, the year 1567: when Shakespeare was still a
little boy; twenty years before Philip II fitted out the Spanish
Armada; forty years before the first English colony settled in
America.  The sun had just well risen, the gates of Vienna had been
opened but a few hours.  Through the great western gate, which cast
its long shadow on the road to Augsburg, came a strange-looking boy.

He lacked but a month or two of seventeen years, was some five feet
two or three inches in height, had an oval face of remarkable beauty
and liveliness, jet black hair, and eyes in which merriment dwelt as
in its home.  He was dressed as became a noble of the time, and in
apparel of unusual splendor and costliness; plumed bonnet, slashed
velvet doublet, tight silken hose, jeweled dagger at his girdle.

But it was odd to see so brilliant a figure on foot in the dusty
highway; still more odd that be carried a rough bundle slung on a
staff over his and that, peasant fashion, he munched at a loaf of
bread as he trudged the road.

By no means stalwart-looking, still he swung along with an easy
stride and a confident strength that many a stouter man might envy.
He was bound for Augsburg, 400 miles to the west, and he set himself
thirty miles a day as his rate of travel.

He wore splendid clothes, because he was Stanislaus, the son of John
Kostka, Lord of Kostkov, Senator, and Castellan of Zakroczym in the
Duchy of Mazovia, Poland. He ate his rough breakfast, like a
peasant, on the road, because he had just been to Mass and received
Holy Communion at the Jesuit church in Vienna. He carried a bundle
on his staff, because he laughed merrily at fine clothes and had in
the bundle a coarse tunic and a stout pair of brogans, which he
meant to put on as soon as he got well out of the city. And his face
and his eyes shone with joy, because he loved God most wonderfully
and was as happy a boy as ever moved through this dull world.

Every age has its adventurers: men who for fame, or for place, or
for money, cross wide seas, fight brave battles, endure great
hardships. The age in which Stanislaus lived was filled with them.
All the world reads with delight the story of such men. And every
decent boy who reads feels himself, if only for the moment, their
fellow in spirit, eager to do what they did and as bravely as they
did.

But was there ever adventure finer than this, ever spirit more gayly
daring? Stanislaus Kostka, son of a noble house, a boy in years,
starting without a copper in his pocket to cross half of Europe
afoot!  And for what?  Not to have men say what a brave chap he was;
not to win a name, or rank, or money: but because God would be
pleased by his doing it, because God called him to do something
which he could not do in Vienna.

He felt he had a vocation to be a Jesuit. He knew his father would
not consent. He took six months to think it over, to pray for light,
to make sure it was no mere whim or fancy of his own, but the very
voice of God.  And when he felt sure, he left a letter for his
brother Paul and his tutor, Bilinski, with whom he had been studying
in Vienna; he gave his money to a couple of beggars; he said, "If
God wants me to do this, He'll furnish the means"; he put on his
best attire, tied up a rough suit in a cloth, took a stout staff in
his hand, and with God's blessing upon him and His Eucharistic
Presence in his heart, stepped out cheerfully on a journey that
would stagger most men.

That is the stuff of which heroes are made. If Stanislaus had done
this for the glory of the world, we should have his praises in our
histories, we should have stories woven about him, the whole world
would cry "Bravo!" But he did it for God, and the world cannot
understand him at all: the world is silent.

An hour or so of that steady, tireless stride carried him well away
from Vienna. He slipped off his velvet and silk, put on his coarse
tunic - a shirt-like garment that came below his knees - girded
himself with a bit of rope, tied his stout shoes on his feet, and
took the road again.  There were folk aplenty journeying from the
countryside to Vienna in the early morning.  Stanislaus picked out
one of the poorest-looking peasants and handed him the gala dress he
had just taken off.

"I can't carry these with me, friend," he said.  "Won't you please
take them? I have no use for them, and perhaps you can sell them in
the city."

And he was gone before the peasant, gaping in wonder at the rich
garments and dagger in his hands, could much more than catch a
glimpse of that bright face and those laughing eyes.

He tramped all day, and made his thirty miles.  When he was hungry,
he asked some one he met for food. It is not likely that any one
would refuse the smiling, handsome boy, from whose face innocence
simply shone. But if any one had refused him, it would not have
annoyed Stanislaus.  His good humor came from heaven, as well as
from his own cheery soul - and you cannot rebuff that kind of good
humor.

Night came down at last, and he was tired out.  He came to an inn
and asked for shelter.

"I have no money," he told the landlord, smiling, "and I have no
claim upon you. Will you take me in?"

The landlord looked at him shrewdly a little, then said with respect:

"But what is your grace doing in such a garb?"

Stanislaus thought for a moment that he was recognized; but he put
on a bold front, and laughed as he said:

"I am not 'your grace.  I am what you see me, and I have a long
journey to make."

In those days it was not unusual for even nobles to go, roughly
clad, upon pilgrimages of devotion.  That Stanislaus was a noble,
the landlord was quite certain. That he might be engaged on some
such pious business, was possible. But who ever heard of a mere boy
going upon pilgrimage?

The whole affair puzzled the landlord more than a little.  However,
the face of the boy reassured him. At least there could be no evil
behind that frank, brave countenance. So he shook his head, saying:

"I do not understand. But come in.   You are welcome."

He gave Stanislaus his supper and a bed to sleep in.

"You shall not be the poorer for this," said Stanislaus, as he
thanked him.  "You know God makes it up to us for even a cup of cold
water given in His name."

And as the boy spoke, the landlord saw his face glow when he spoke
of God and he was very glad at heart that he had given shelter and
food, to this strange boy.

Stanislaus slept soundly. But he was up with the sun, washed and
dressed quickly, and went to thank his host again before setting
out.

"But you will have something to eat before you go?" cried the man,
as Stanislaus stood before him, staff in hand, ready for the road.

"It is good of you to offer it," the boy answered.  "But perhaps I
shall find a church before long, and I must go fasting to Holy
Communion."

Then the landlord marvelled again, for at that period even good
people did not go very often to Holy Communion, especially when they
were traveling hard, as Stanislaus evidently was.  And his
admiration and liking grew for this boy with the merry face and the
heart so near heaven.

"At least," he said, "you must take something with you for the way."

And that Stanislaus did not refuse, but accepted gratefully, and so
parted from the kind landlord, leaving him gazing in the doorway
with wonder in his eyes.

His legs were a bit stiff and sore this second day.  But the first
few miles wore that off, and he swung on his way as bravely and
gayly as before.


CHAPTER II

THE PURSUIT

Meanwhile, there was a hubbub in Vienna. Stanislaus had lived in
that city about three years with his brother Paul, who was about a
year older than he, and in the care of a tutor, a young man named
Bilinski. He had left them in the early morning.  As the day wore on
and he did not return home, they became uneasy. They went about all
afternoon, inquiring amongst their friends and acquaintance if any
had seen him.  Only one or two were in the secret, and they kept
discreet silence.

Unable therefore to get any trace of Stanislaus, they soon came to
the conclusion that he had fled.  And, as we shall see, they had
good reason in their own hearts for guessing that from the first.
They returned to the house of the Senator Kimberker, where they were
all lodging, and taking Kimberker, who was a Lutheran, into their
confidence, they held a council of war.

It was decided that Stanislaus must have gone to Augsburg.  Paul
recalled something that Stanislaus had said to him only the day
before, when he had threatened plainly to run away. And they had
heard him say, another time, that at Augsburg was Peter Canisius,
the Provincial of the German Jesuits. Of course they were going to
follow him and bring him back. But night had come on before their
inquiries and deliberations were finished.  They must wait till the
next day.

Accordingly, bright and early the following morning, all three, with
one of the Kostkas' servants, drove out in a carriage over the
Augsburg road. They had four good horses and they told their
coachman not to spare the whip. They came to the inn where
Stanislaus had spent the night. They questioned the landlord.

"Have you seen a boy of seventeen, a Polish noble, pass westward
along this road yesterday or today?"

But the landlord was shrewd, and though the whole matter was beyond
him, he fancied somehow that these eager folk were no great friends
of the boy who had lodged with him.  And as he trusted that boy and
could scarcely help being loyal to him, he shrugged his shoulders
and answered:

"How should I know? So many travel this road."

Then Bilinski described Stanislaus and his doublet of velvet and
hose of silk and jeweled dagger. But at that the landlord shook his
head in denial.

"I have seen no such person as your graces describe,"  he said.

Bilinski called out to the coachman:

"Drive on. We have nothing to learn here."

But Paul said: "NQ let us turn back. He cannot have walked this far
in one day. We must have passed him on the road."

"Perhaps you could not have walked so far," said Bilinski, with a
sneer.  "But Stanislaus could. Drive on!"

Forty miles or more out of Vienna, they saw a boy trudging ahead of
them, in a rough tunic, rope-girdled, with a staff in his hand. At
the noise of the hurrying wheels the boy glanced back, then quickly
turned up a lane which there entered the road. He did not look in
the least like a nobleman's son, and the carriage passed the bottom
of the lane without so much as slacking speed.

Stanislaus ran up the lane until he came to where it ended at a
rough, brawling stream. Without a moment's hesitation he put off his
shoes, tucked up his tunic, and began wading in the course of the
stream. The water was cold, the sharp stones in the bed of the
stream bruised his feet, at any moment he might fall into a deep
hole and be drowned. But he splashed and stumbled ahead, as fast as
he could go, praying to his guardian angel to have care of him. A
little farther, he knew, the highway crossed this stream by a
bridge, and there he could leave the water and regain the road.

The carriage meantime kept on and came to this bridge.  But Paul had
been thinking of the young fellow who took to the lane when he saw
the carriage approach and a shrewd suspicion came into his head.

"Did you see that boy who ran up the lane?" he cried at length to
Bilinski.  "I believe it was Stanislaus."

"But he was dressed like a peasant," said Bilinski. "And Stanislaus
had on a handsome suit."

They debated for a time, but Paul prevailed. Round they turned and
drove furiously back to the lane. But as the driver tried to turn
his horses into it, the animals reared and balked and refused to
enter. Blows and curses were showered on them; they merely stood and
trembled; no efforts could urge them into the lane. Then the driver
grew afraid, and cried out:

"My Lord Paul, we cannot go into this lane.  And before God, I have
fear upon me! Never have the horses acted this way."

And indeed fear seized them all.  They saw the hand of God in this
strange obstinancy of their beasts.  Even Kimberker cried the pursuit.

"Fear God!" he said.  "For this is no common mishap!"

And when they turned the horses' heads again toward Vienna, the
animals snorted and pranced and went very willingly.

And so, when Stanislaus came to the bridge, the highway was clear.
After a look about, he put on his shoes, gripped his staff afresh,
and took up again cheerily as ever his thirty miles a day to
Augsburg.

Day after day, tired and footsore, he told off the long miles,
begging his food and lodging as he went; fearless and happy, praying
like an angel of God as he walked along.

Many were kind to him for the brave, bright spirit that shone out in
his face. Many remembered those words of our Lord, "Whatsoever you
have done unto the least of these my brethren, you have done it unto
me," and willingly sheltered the boy and gave him to eat.  Sometimes
he turned into the fields beside the road and slept through the warm
August night beneath the open sky. Whenever he came to a church in
the morning, he heard Mass and received Holy Communion, for he
started out each morning fasting. And on the fourteenth day he
reached Augsburg.

What happened there, we shall see in another chapter, and how within
three weeks this smiling boy turned his face southward and tramped
another eight hundred miles on foot to Rome.  But just that will
show you something of the spirit of Stanislaus, the spirit of a
hero. All that a knight might do out of love for his lady, he did
out of love for God. He really loved God with a sort of fierce
intensity. And he wanted to show his love in deeds, just as we want
to show our love for a person by doing something, by giving
something.  God had given him everything, he would give God
everything: that was the whole of his life. And with that generosity
went a fine common sense. He was not rash or headlong, acting first
and thinking afterward. He reckoned things out calmly and sensibly,
and then went ahead with a pluck and determination that nothing in
the world could stop.

God asked a fearfully hard thing of him; to leave his people, his
home; to set out afoot on an enormous journey; to undergo no end of
hardships and humiliations; to live in a strange land, among strange
people. And he did it, did it smilingly, joyfully, with a simple,
quiet bravery seldom if ever matched by any other boy in the world.

The one thing that staggers us is his reason for doing it, his great
love for God. And that is because we have not got, what we could
easily get, his secret. He prayed, he kept close in thought to God
always. God and heaven and our Lady were as familiar to his mind as
the sun and the earth and the air are to our mind's. The earth to
him was only the antechamber of heaven. He looked upon life as one
looks upon a little delay at a railway station before the train
leaves; the only important thing is to catch the train.


CHAPTER III

EARLY DAYS

Bilinski and Paul Kostka went back to Vienna, much troubled at
heart. They really loved Stanislaus, for one thing, though they had
been pretty rough with him. And for another, they had to face the
anger of the Lord John Kostka, when he should hear of Stanislaus'
flight.

Shortly after they had got back, a young friend of the runaway came
to them and said:

"If you look between the leaves of such-and-such a book, you will
find a letter which Stanislaus left for you."

They looked and found the letter. It was very simple and
straightforward, a genuine boy's letter. He had run away, he said,
because he had to. He was called to enter the Society of Jesus. He
had to do what God wanted of him. He knew they would prevent him if
they could. And so he just went. He left them messages of
affectionate regard, and begged them to forward his letter to his
father.

Bilinski sent this letter on at once. Paul also wrote, as did
Kimberker and even the servant who had gone with them in the
carriage.  Each tried to shift the blame from himself, told of the
strange behavior of the horses, explained that everything possible
had been done to overtake the fugitive.

And when their letters came, there was high wrath in Kostkov. The
Lord John raved and swore. He blamed everybody, but most of all
Stanislaus and the tricky Jesuits who, he said, were back of the
whole scheme.  He wrote to Cardinal Osius that he would not rest
until he had broken up the Jesuit college in Pultowa and driven
every schemer of them out of Poland. As for Stanislaus, he would
follow him across the world, if need were, and drag him back to
Kostkov in chains.

He was a great lord, the Lord John. He loved his second son,
Stanislaus, most dearly, and he loved dearly the honor of his house,
which he thought that son had stained by hi& conduct. A son of his
in beggar's garb, tramping the highways of Europe, begging his bread
from door to door! It nearly broke his heart.

He had princely blood in his veins, he was a Senator of Poland, he
might even become a king. His dearest hopes were in Stanislaus, his
second son.  Paul, the eldest, was wild and unsteady. And though
there were two other sons and a daughter, none gave such promise as
Stanislaus.  So that the Lord John looked chiefly to him to carry on
the great name and make it more glorious still. No wonder he raged!

Stanislaus had figured all that out beforehand. It hurt him too,
hurt terribly. But what can one do when God calls? God had made all
the Kostkas, given them name and rank. God was the Lord of Lords. It
was heart-breaking to Stanislaus to leave his father in anger. Yet
he trusted that since that was God's will - well, God would find a
way to bring peace out of all this trouble. He put all his fears and
heartache away from him, and went out to do what God wanted.

He had always done that, even when he was a little tad in the rough
castle at Kostkov. God had taught him, God had helped him
wonderfully. But more wonderful still to our eyes is the way the boy
listened to God's teaching and obeyed it.

We think things come easy to the saints. We read or hear of wonders
in their lives, which are evidently God's doing; and we say:

"Of course the saint was good and holy. But it was all done for him.
God made everything smooth. The saint was never in my boots for a minute."

And all the time we forget the things which the saint himself did,
the superb efforts he had to make.

So Stanislaus began to pray as soon as he well began to speak. Do
you think he would not sooner have kept on with his play? Do you
think he did not naturally hate the effort just as any boy naturally
hates effort?

He lived amongst rough men, men used to the ways of camps and the
speech of soldiers. Yet he not merely kept his own lips" clean, but
he shrank, as from a blow, from every coarse or indecent speech in
others. He did not go around correcting people.  He was too sensible
for that. He was not a prig or a prude.  But he knew, as we know,
that vile speech is hateful to God; and, as so many of us do not do,
he set his face against it.

Did that cost him no effort? Had he no human respect to fight
against? Think of how many times you may have grinned, cowardly, at
a gross remark or shady story of a comrade - because you were not
fighter enough to resent it! And then give this Stanislaus, who did
resent, credit for his stouter courage, his more manly spirit.

His biographers tell us that he was simply' free from temptations
against purity.  That does not mean what many may think it means:
that he was physically unlike other boys, that he had no animal
desires, that he had nothing to fight against.  It means that he was
such a magnificent fighter that he had won the battle almost from
the start.  It means that he was not content, as so many of us are,
with merely pushing a temptation a little aside, and then looking
around in surprise to find it still there.  He was like a skillful
boxer, who wards off every blow of his adversary, so that he goes
through the contest absolutely untouched.  He watched, as we are too
lazy to watch; he kept out of danger, where we foolishly run into
it; he did not wait until temptation had set upon him and nearly
battered him down before he began to resist; he saw it coming afar
off, just as we can if we look out, and he met it with a rush that
sent it again beyond reach or even sight.

OF COURSE he was the same as other boys; OF COURSE he had the same
inclinations, the same promptings of the animal man; but with them
he had more daring, more force and energy of will to cooperate with
God's grace.

You always find it that way. The things the saints seem to do with
ease are terrifically hard things, huge battles, regular slugging
fights. The ease, if there be any, is not in the things they did,
but in the men who did them.

You have seen skilled pianists sit down at their instruments and run
off into brisk flowing music what looks like a hopeless jumble of
notes.  You may have seen an artist sketch in, whilst chatting idly,
a swift, striking portrait.  Well, all really good men are artists
too; artists in fighting. And Stanislaus was one of the cleverest
and strongest artists of the lot.

He began early, just as the musician Mozart did, just as the painter
Raffaele did; and he studied hard at his art, just as all great
artists have done. He began by saying his prayers well, not mere lip
prayers, but heart prayers.  He began by getting on easy terms with
God, with our Lord in the Blessed Sacrament, with our Blessed Lady.
 He learned to talk with them as we learn to talk with our fathers
and mothers.  He told them his troubles, his plans.  He talked
everything over with them.  And it no more made him queer or stiff
or unpleasant than talking things over with your comrades or your
parents makes you queer or stiff or unpleasant.  If you believe in
God, it is the most natural thing in the world to try to take Him
into your confidence.


Then it is easy to see how, as Stanislaus grew older, he liked to
pray, he liked to talk about God and our Lady.  You see, he had
grown to know them. They were not remote, far away.  They were as
near to him as his own folk.  They were his own folk.  And it is
easy to see how, keeping in God's sight all the time, he kept his
soul clean and his heart merry.


CHAPTER IV

OFF TO VIENNA

In this way Stanislaus went on until he was nearly fourteen years
old and his brother Paul was approaching fifteen.  Then the Lord
John Kostka thought his boys had better continue their studies, not
at home, but at a regular school.  He picked out John Bilinski, a
young man who had lately completed his college course, as tutor for
them.  He gave them a couple of servants, mounted them all on good
horses, and sent them off six hundred miles or more on horseback to
Vienna.

You may be sure Stanislaus enjoyed the long ride.  It would be
strange if he, a nobleman of the finest cavalry nation in the world,
were not a good horseman.  He loved the smell of the open fields, he
loved the boisterous song of the mountain torrent.  The hills and
the plains were his home, for the hills and the plains were nearer
to God than the houses of men.

In those days all travel was on foot or on horseback.  The wealthy
and noble rode, the poor footed it.  Great highways cut Europe from
end to end; though there were tracts in Stanislaus' country where
the roadway was only the broad steppe, where the grasses waved and
tossed like the sea, where men were few and their dwellings
scattered far apart.

They crossed great rivers, they climbed the foothills of the
Carpathian mountains.  Many a night Paul and Stanislaus, with their
people, slept under the stars.  Many a wild, rough border town they
passed.  Many a great forest they penetrated, the home of the wild
boar and the aurochs.

And the tar burners in the forests looked up from under their matted
brows at the fair oval face of the Polish boy, and said:

"He is like a wild flower blown by the wind. He is like the violets
that laugh in spring at the sun."

And the shaggy fighting-men of the frontier villages watched him
ride through their streets, and thought:

"This is an angel.  He looks toward heaven because he sees his
Brothers there."

They crossed themselves piously as he passed. And some of the light
and laughter of his face glowed 'for a moment in their dark lives,
as a gloomy glen in the forest is brightened up by a darting ray of
sunlight.

He was wonderful, but he was always a boy. He was glad to feel the
good horse under him, to grip the Tartar saddle with his knees, to
feel the air rush by his cheek.

Sometimes they met poor people staggering wearily afoot along the
road.  Often Stanislaus checked his horse and lightly dismounted.

"Get up, get up, old father!" he would cry. "My legs are stiff from
the saddle.  I want to walk."

And though a peasant might often be afraid to accept the favor from
a noble, or be surly and churlish, the folk never were so with
Stanislaus.  Up climbed the old father into the saddle, and
Stanislaus stepped out by his side.

"God give your grace long years!" said the thankful old man.

"Long years!" cried Stanislaus. I want more than that.  I want
eternity.  I was born for greater things than long years."

And the old man would understand; for he was of the poor, and the
poor know more of this longing for heaven than do the rich.  But he
looked almost with awe at this richly dressed noble boy who had
learned even now to value life so justly. Then it was easy for
Stanislaus to talk of heaven to the old man.

"Old father, in the barony of the Lord Jesus there is no poverty or
old age or weariness. Nor is there any difference of rank there as
here, for we shall all be great lords and castellans in heaven."

"Aye, but your grace will be a hetman surely in the army of the Lord
Jesus," said the old man.

"Who knows!" cried Stanislaus. "I should love that dearly.  Though
the generals in His kingdom are not always from amongst the nobles.
It may be that you will be hetman, and I a common soldier. But it is
good to be even a common soldier with Him."

"I went against the Tartars in my youth," said the old man. "Perhaps
we shall have a campaign against that dog-brother Lucifer, and Saint
Michael and Saint Wenceslaus will lead us under the Lord Jesus; and
our Lady of Yasna Gora will look on when we come back victorious!"

And so they talked on until it was time to set the old man down, and
Stanislaus mounted again to catch up with his party, which had gone
ahead.

"With God!" cried the old man.

"With God!" echoed Stanislaus.  'And if you go to heaven before me,
father, do not forget to plead for me with the Lord Jesus and with
His Mother."

Then he clattered along the road, and shortly came up with Bilinski
and Paul.

Sometimes they came to districts infested by robbers, and waited to
join themselves to some larger party for protection.  Sometimes they
made long stretches of many hours in the saddle, when the inns were
far apart and they could get no food on the road.  Sometimes they
tarried a day or two in a little town to rest their horses.

But everywhere Stanislaus thought of God, and prayed, and when
occasion offered spoke of holy things as only he could speak.
Bilinski and Paul often laughed at him, for they were of a different
stamp.  But he did not mind their ridicule, and he bore them no
grudge for it. And so, after. many days, they came at length to
Vienna, on July 26, 1564.


CHAPTER V

SCHOOL DAYS

Vienna WAS a great city, even in those days, since for a long time
it had been the residence of the Roman Emperors of the West.  It was
a Catholic city, though even in 1564, little more than forty years
after Luther's revolt, the Lutherans in the city had begun to be
quite numerous.

The Society of Jesus had been founded in 1540, only ten years before
Stanislaus was born.  But it had spread quickly.