# Tetrabiblos
Author: Claudius Ptolemy
Category: 01_astrologia
Source: Gutenberg #43046
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:16:09.728462
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

PLANET of DREAD

                         By MURRAY LEINSTER

                         Illustrator ADKINS


    [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Fantastic Stories
    of Imagination May 1962. Extensive research did not uncover any
    evidence that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




     _Moran cut apart the yard-long monstrosity with a slash of flame.
     The thing presumably died, but it continued to writhe senselessly.
     He turned to see other horrors crawling toward him. Then he knew he
     was being marooned on a planet of endless terrors._


I.

Moran, naturally, did not mean to help in the carrying out of the plans
which would mean his destruction one way or another. The plans were
thrashed out very painstakingly, in formal conference on the space-yacht
_Nadine_, with Moran present and allowed to take part in the discussion.
From the viewpoint of the _Nadine's_ ship's company, it was simply
necessary to get rid of Moran. In their predicament he might have come
to the same conclusion; but he was not at all enthusiastic about their
decision. He would die of it.

The _Nadine_ was out of overdrive and all the uncountable suns of the
galaxy shone steadily, remotely, as infinitesimal specks of light of
every color of the rainbow. Two hours since, the sun of this solar
system had been a vast glaring disk off to port, with streamers and
prominences erupting about its edges. Now it lay astern, and Moran
could see the planet that had been chosen for his marooning. It was a
cloudy world. There were some dim markings near one lighted limb, but
nowhere else. There was an ice-cap in view. The rest was--clouds.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ice-cap, by its existence and circular shape, proved that the planet
rotated at a not unreasonable rate. The fact that it was water-ice told
much. A water-ice ice-cap said that there were no poisonous gases in the
planet's atmosphere. Sulfur dioxide or chlorine, for example, would not
allow the formation of water-ice. It would have to be sulphuric-acid or
hydrochloric-acid ice. But the ice-cap was simple snow. Its size, too,
told about temperature-distribution on the planet. A large cap would
have meant a large area with arctic and sub-arctic temperatures, with
small temperate and tropical climate-belts. A small one like this meant
wide tropical and sub-tropical zones. The fact was verified by the
thick, dense cloud-masses which covered most of the surface,--all the
surface, in fact, outside the ice-cap. But since there were ice-caps
there would be temperate regions. In short, the ice-cap proved that a
man could endure the air and temperature conditions he would find.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran observed these things from the control-room of the _Nadine_, then
approaching the world on planetary drive. He was to be left here, with
no reason ever to expect rescue. Two of the _Nadine's_ four-man crew
watched out the same ports as the planet seemed to approach. Burleigh
said encouragingly;

"It doesn't look too bad, Moran!"

Moran disagreed, but he did not answer. He cocked an ear instead. He
heard something. It was a thin, wabbling, keening whine. No natural
radiation sounds like that. Moran nodded toward the all-band speaker.

"Do you hear what I do?" he asked sardonically.

Burleigh listened. A distinctly artificial signal came out of the
speaker. It wasn't a voice-signal. It wasn't an identification beacon,
such as are placed on certain worlds for the convenience of interstellar
skippers who need to check their courses on extremely long runs. This
was something else.

Burleigh said:

"Hm ... Call the others, Harper."

Harper, prudently with him in the control-room, put his head into the
passage leading away. He called. But Moran observed with grudging
respect that he didn't give him a chance to do anything drastic. These
people on the _Nadine_ were capable. They'd managed to recapture the
_Nadine_ from him, but they were matter-of-fact about it. They didn't
seem to resent what he'd tried to do, or that he'd brought them an
indefinite distance in an indefinite direction from their last
landing-point, and they had still to re-locate themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

They'd been on Coryus Three and they'd gotten departure clearance from
its space-port. With clearance-papers in order, they could land
unquestioned at any other space-port and take off again--provided the
other space-port was one they had clearance for. Without rigid control
of space-travel, any criminal anywhere could escape the consequences of
any crime simply by buying a ticket to another world. Moran couldn't
have bought a ticket, but he'd tried to get off the planet Coryus on the
_Nadine_. The trouble was that the _Nadine_ had clearance papers
covering five persons aboard--four men and a girl Carol. Moran made six.
Wherever the yacht landed, such a disparity between its documents and
its crew would spark an investigation. A lengthy, incredibly minute
investigation. Moran, at least, would be picked out as a fugitive from
Coryus Three. The others were fugitives too, from some unnamed world
Moran did not know. They might be sent back where they came from. In
effect, with six people on board instead of five, the _Nadine_ could not
land anywhere for supplies. With five on board, as her papers declared,
she could. And Moran was the extra man whose presence would rouse
space-port officials' suspicion of the rest. So he had to be dumped.

He couldn't blame them. He'd made another difficulty, too. Blaster in
hand, he'd made the _Nadine_ take off from Coryus III with a trip-tape
picked at random for guidance. But the trip-tape had been computed for
another starting-point, and when the yacht came out of overdrive it was
because the drive had been dismantled in the engine-room. So the ship's
location was in doubt. It could have travelled at almost any speed in
practically any direction for a length of time that was at least
indefinite. A liner could re-locate itself without trouble. It had
elaborate observational equipment and tri-di star-charts. But smaller
craft had to depend on the Galactic Directory. The process would be to
find a planet and check its climate and relationship to other planets,
and its flora and fauna against descriptions in the Directory. That was
the way to find out where one was, when one's position became doubtful.
The _Nadine_ needed to make a planet-fall for this.

The rest of the ship's company came into the control-room. Burleigh
waved his hand at the speaker.

"Listen!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They heard it. All of them. It was a trilling, whining sound among the
innumerable random noises to be heard in supposedly empty space.

"That's a marker," Carol announced. "I saw a costume-story tape once
that had that sound in it. It marked a first-landing spot on some planet
or other, so the people could find that spot again. It was supposed to
be a long time ago, though."

"It's weak," observed Burleigh. "We'll try answering it."

Moran stirred, and he knew that every one of the others was conscious of
the movement. But they didn't watch him suspiciously. They were alert by
long habit. Burleigh said they'd been Underground people, fighting the
government of their native world, and they'd gotten away to make it seem
the revolt had collapsed. They'd go back later when they weren't
expected, and start it up again. Moran considered the story probable.
Only people accustomed to desperate actions would have remained so calm
when Moran had used desperate measures against them.

Burleigh picked up the transmitter-microphone.

"Calling ground," he said briskly. "Calling ground! We pick up your
signal. Please reply."

He repeated the call, over and over and over. There was no answer.
Cracklings and hissings came out of the speaker as before, and the thin
and reedy wabbling whine continued. The _Nadine_ went on toward the
enlarging cloudy mass ahead.

Burleigh said;

"Well?"

"I think," said Carol, "that we should land. People have been here. If
they left a beacon, they may have left an identification of the planet.
Then we'd know where we are and how to get to Loris."

Burleigh nodded. The _Nadine_ had cleared for Loris. That was where it
should make its next landing. The little yacht went on. All five of its
proper company watched as the planet's surface enlarged. The ice-cap
went out of sight around the bulge of the globe, but no markings
appeared. There were cloud-banks everywhere, probably low down in the
atmosphere. The darker vague areas previously seen might have been
highlands.

"I think," said Carol, to Moran, "that if it's too tropical where this
signal's coming from, we'll take you somewhere near enough to the
ice-cap to have an endurable climate. I've been figuring on food, too.
That will depend on where we are from Loris because we have to keep
enough for ourselves. But we can spare some. We'll give you the
emergency-kit, anyhow."

       *       *       *       *       *

The emergency-kit contained antiseptics, seeds, and a weapon or two,
with elaborate advice to castaways. If somebody were wrecked on an even
possibly habitable planet, the especially developed seed-strains would
provide food in a minimum of time. It was not an encouraging thought,
though, and Moran grimaced.

She hadn't said anything about being sorry that he had to be marooned.
Maybe she was, but rebels learn to be practical or they don't live long.
Moran wondered, momentarily, what sort of world they came from and why
they had revolted, and what sort of set-back to the revolt had sent the
five off in what they considered a strategic retreat but their
government would think defeat. Moran's own situation was perfectly
clear.

He'd killed a man on Coryus III. His victim would not be mourned by
anybody, and somebody formerly in very great danger would now be safe,
which was the reason for what Moran had done. But the dead man had been
very important, and the fact that Moran had forced him to fight and
killed him in fair combat made no difference. Moran had needed to get
off-planet, and fast. But space-travel regulations are especially
designed to prevent such escapes.

He'd made a pretty good try, at that. One of the controls on
space-traffic required a ship on landing to deposit its fuel-block in
the space-port's vaults. The fuel-block was not returned until clearance
for departure had been granted. But Moran had waylaid the messenger
carrying the _Nadine's_ fuel-block back to that space-yacht. He'd
knocked the messenger cold and presented himself at the yacht with the
fuel. He was admitted. He put the block in the engine's gate. He duly
took the plastic receipt-token the engine only then released, and he
drew a blaster. He'd locked two of the _Nadine's_ crew in the
engine-room, rushed to the control-room without encountering the others,
dogged the door shut, and threaded in the first trip-tape to come to
hand. He punched the take-off button and only seconds later the
overdrive. Then the yacht--and Moran--was away. But his present
companions got the drive dismantled two days later and once the yacht
was out of overdrive they efficiently gave him his choice of
surrendering or else. He surrendered, stipulating that he wouldn't be
landed back on Coryus; he still clung to hope of avoiding return--which
was almost certain anyhow. Because nobody would want to go back to a
planet from which they'd carried away a criminal, even though they'd
done it unwillingly. Investigation of such a matter might last for
months.

Now the space-yacht moved toward a vast mass of fleecy whiteness without
any visible features. Harper stayed with the direction-finder. From time
to time he gave readings requiring minute changes of course. The
wabbling, whining signal was louder now. It became louder than all the
rest of the space-noises together.

       *       *       *       *       *

The yacht touched atmosphere and Burleigh said;

"Watch our height, Carol."

She stood by the echometer. Sixty miles. Fifty. Thirty. A correction of
course. Fifteen miles to surface below. Ten. Five. At twenty-five
thousand feet there were clouds, which would be particles of ice so
small that they floated even so high. Then clear air, then lower clouds,
and lower ones still. It was not until six thousand feet above the
surface that the planet-wide cloud-level seemed to begin. From there on
down it was pure opacity. Anything could exist in that dense, almost
palpable grayness. There could be jagged peaks.

The _Nadine_ went down and down. At fifteen hundred feet above the
unseen surface, the clouds ended. Below, there was only haze. One could
see the ground, at least, but there was no horizon. There was only an
end to visibility. The yacht descended as if in the center of a sphere
in which one could see clearly nearby, less clearly at a little
distance, and not at all beyond a quarter-mile or so.

There was a shaded, shadowless twilight under the cloud-bank. The ground
looked like no ground ever seen before by anyone. Off to the right a
rivulet ran between improbable-seeming banks. There were a few very
small hills of most unlikely appearance. It was the ground, the matter
on which one would walk, which was strangest. It had color, but the
color was not green. Much of it was a pallid, dirty-yellowish white. But
there were patches of blue, and curious veinings of black, and here and
there were other colors, all of them unlike the normal color of
vegetation on a planet with a sol-type sun.

Harper spoke from the direction-finder;

"The signal's coming from that mound, yonder."

There was a hillock of elongated shape directly in line with the
_Nadine's_ course in descent. Except for the patches of color, it was
the only considerable landmark within the half-mile circle in which
anything could be seen at all.

The _Nadine_ checked her downward motion. Interplanetary drive is rugged
and sure, but it does not respond to fine adjustment. Burleigh used
rockets, issuing great bellowings of flame, to make actual contact. The
yacht hovered, and as the rocket-flames diminished slowly she sat down
with practically no impact at all. But around her there was a monstrous
tumult of smoke and steam. When the rockets went off, she lay in a
burned-out hollow some three or four feet deep with a bottom of solid
stone. The walls of the hollow were black and scorched. It seemed that
at some places they quivered persistently.

There was silence in the control-room save for the whining noise which
now was almost deafening. Harper snapped off the switch. Then there was
true silence. The space-yacht had come to rest possibly a hundred yards
from the mound which was the source of the space-signal. That mound
shared the peculiarity of the ground as far as they could see through
the haze. It was not vegetation in any ordinary sense. Certainly it was
no mineral surface! The landing-pockets had burned away three or four
feet of it, and the edge of the burned area smoked noisesomely, and
somehow it looked as if it would reek. And there were places where it
stirred.

Burleigh blinked and stared. Then he reached up and flicked on the
outside microphones. Instantly there was bedlam. If the landscape was
strange, here, the sounds that came from it were unbelievable.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were grunting noises. There were clickings, uncountable clickings
that made a background for all the rest. There were discordant howls and
honkings. From time to time some thing unknown made a cry that sounded
very much like a small boy trailing a stick against a picket fence, only
much louder. Something hooted, maintaining the noise for an impossibly
long time. And persistently, sounding as if they came from far away,
there were booming noises, unspeakably deep-bass, made by something
alive. And something shrieked in lunatic fashion and something else
still moaned from time to time with the volume of a steam-whistle....

"This sounds and looks like a nice place to live," said Moran with fine
irony.

Burleigh did not answer. He turned down the outside sound.

"What's that stuff there, the ground?" he demanded. "We burned it away
in landing. I've seen something like it somewhere, but never taking the
place of grass!"

"That," said Moran as if brightly, "that's what I'm to make a garden in.
Of evenings I'll stroll among my thrifty plantings and listen to the
delightful sounds of nature."

Burleigh scowled. Harper flicked off the direction-finder.

"The signal still comes from that hillock yonder," he said with
finality.

Moran said bitingly;

"That ain't no hillock, that's my home!"

Then, instantly he'd said it, he recognized that it could be true. The
mound was not a fold in the ground. It was not an up-cropping of the
ash-covered stone on which the _Nadine_ rested. The enigmatic,
dirty-yellow-dirty-red-dirty-blue-and-dirty-black ground-cover hid
something. It blurred the shape it covered, very much as enormous
cobwebs made solid and opaque would have done. But when one looked
carefully at the mound, there was a landing-fin sticking up toward the
leaden skies. It was attached to a large cylindrical object of which the
fore part was crushed in. The other landing-fins could be traced.

"It's a ship," said Moran curtly. "It crash-landed and its crew set up a
signal to call for help. None came, or they'd have turned the beacon
off. Maybe they got the lifeboats to work and got away. Maybe they lived
as I'm expected to live until they died as I'm expected to die."

Burleigh said angrily;

"You'd do what we are doing if you were in our shoes!"

"Sure," said Moran, "but a man can gripe, can't he?"

"You won't have to live here," said Burleigh. "We'll take you somewhere
up by the ice-cap. As Carol said, we'll give you everything we can
spare. And meanwhile we'll take a look at that wreck yonder. There might
be an indication in it of what solar system this is. There could be
something in it of use to you, too. You'd better come along when we
explore."

"Aye, aye, sir," said Moran with irony. "Very kind of you, sir. You'll
go armed, sir?"

Burleigh growled;

"Naturally!"

"Then since I can't be trusted with a weapon," said Moran, "I suggest
that I take a torch. We may have to burn through that loathesome stuff
to get in the ship."

"Right," growled Burleigh again. "Brawn and Carol, you'll keep ship. The
rest of us wear suits. We don't know what that stuff is outside."

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran silently went to the space-suit rack and began to get into a
suit. Modern space-suits weren't like the ancient crudities with bulging
metal casings and enormous globular helmets. Non-stretch fabrics took
the place of metal, and constant-volume joints were really practical
nowadays. A man could move about in a late-model space-suit almost as
easily as in ship-clothing. The others of the landing-party donned their
special garments with the brisk absence of fumbling that these people
displayed in every action.

"If there's a lifeboat left," said Carol suddenly, "Moran might be able
to do something with it."

"Ah, yes!" said Moran. "It's very likely that the ship hit hard enough
to kill everybody aboard, but not smash the boats!"

"Somebody survived the crash," said Burleigh, "because they set up a
beacon. I wouldn't count on a boat, Moran."

"I don't!" snapped Moran.

He flipped the fastener of his suit. He felt all the openings catch. He
saw the others complete their equipment. They took arms. So far they had
seen no moving thing outside, but arms were simple sanity on an unknown
world. Moran, though, would not be permitted a weapon. He picked up a
torch. They filed into the airlock. The inner door closed. The outer
door opened. It was not necessary to check the air specifically. The
suits would take care of that. Anyhow the ice-cap said there were no
water-soluble gases in the atmosphere, and a gas can't be an active
poison if it can't dissolve.

They filed out of the airlock. They stood on ash-covered stone, only
slightly eroded by the processes which made life possible on this
planet. They looked dubiously at the scorched, indefinite substance
which had been ground before the _Nadine_ landed. Moran moved scornfully
forward. He kicked at the burnt stuff. His foot went through the char.
The hole exposed a cheesy mass of soft matter which seemed riddled with
small holes.

Something black came squirming frantically out of one of the openings.
It was eight or ten inches long. It had a head, a thorax, and an
abdomen. It had wing-cases. It had six legs. It toppled down to the
stone on which the _Nadine_ rested. Agitatedly, it spread its
wing-covers and flew away, droning loudly. The four men heard the sound
above even the monstrous cacophony of cries and boomings and grunts and
squeaks which seemed to fill the air.

"What the devil--."

Moran kicked again. More holes. More openings. More small tunnels in the
cheese-like, curd-like stuff. More black things squirming to view in
obvious panic. They popped out everywhere. It was suddenly apparent
that the top of the soil, here, was a thick and blanket-like sheet over
the whitish stuff. The black creatures lived and thrived in tunnels
under it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carol's voice came over the helmet-phones.

"_They're--bugs!_" she said incredulously. "_They're beetles! They're
twenty times the size of the beetles we humans have been carrying around
the galaxy, but that's what they are!_"

Moran grunted. Distastefully, he saw his predicament made worse. He knew
what had happened here. He could begin to guess at other things to be
discovered. It had not been practical for men to move onto new planets
and subsist upon the flora and fauna they found there. On some new
planets life had never gotten started. On such worlds a highly complex
operation was necessary before humanity could move in. A complete
ecological complex had to be built up; microbes to break down the rock
for soil, bacteria to fix nitrogen to make the soil fertile; plants to
grow in the new-made dirt and insects to fertilize the plants so they
would multiply, and animals and birds to carry the seeds planet-wide. On
most planets, to be sure, there were local, aboriginal plants and
animals. But still terrestrial creatures had to be introduced if a
colony was to feed itself. Alien plants did not supply satisfactory
food. So an elaborate adaptation job had to be done on every planet
before native and terrestrial living things settled down together. It
wasn't impossible that the scuttling things were truly beetles, grown
large and monstrous under the conditions of a new planet. And the
ground....

"This ground stuff," said Moran distastefully, "is yeast or some sort of
toadstool growth. This is a seedling world. It didn't have any life on
it, so somebody dumped germs and spores and bugs to make it ready for
plants and animals eventually. But nobody's come back to finish up the
job."

Burleigh grunted a somehow surprised assent. But it wasn't surprising;
not wholly so. Once one mentioned yeasts and toadstools and fungi
generally, the weird landscape became less than incredible. But it
remained actively unpleasant to think of being marooned on it.

"Suppose we go look at the ship?" said Moran unpleasantly. "Maybe you
can find out where you are, and I can find out what's ahead of me."

He climbed up on the unscorched surface. It was elastic. The
parchment-like top skin yielded. It was like walking on a mass of
springs.

"We'd better spread out," added Moran, "or else we'll break through that
skin and be floundering in this mess."

"I'm giving the orders, Moran!" said Burleigh shortly. "But what you say
does make sense."

       *       *       *       *       *

He and the others joined Moran on the yielding surface. Their footing
was uncertain, as on a trampoline. They staggered. They moved toward the
hillock which was a covered-over wrecked ship.

The ground was not as level as it appeared from the _Nadine's_
control-room. There were undulations. But they could not see more than a
quarter-mile in any direction. Beyond that was mist. But Burleigh, at
one end of the uneven line of advancing men, suddenly halted and stood
staring down at something he had not seen before. The others halted.

Something moved. It came out from behind a very minor spire of whitish
stuff that looked like a dirty sheet stretched over a tall stone. The
thing that appeared was very peculiar indeed. It was a--worm. But it was
a foot thick and ten feet long, and it had a group of stumpy legs at its
fore end--where there were eyes hidden behind bristling hair-like
growths--and another set of feet at its tail end. It progressed sedately
by reaching forward with its fore-part, securing a foothold, and then
arching its middle portion like a cat arching its back, to bring its
hind part forward. Then it reached forward again. It was of a dark olive
color from one end to the other. Its manner of walking was insane but
somehow sedate.

Moran heard muffled noises in his helmet-phone as the others tried to
speak. Carol's voice came anxiously;

"_What's the matter? What do you see?_"

Moran said with savage precision;

"We're looking at an inch-worm, grown up like the beetles only more so.
It's not an inch-worm any longer. It's a yard-worm." Then he said
harshly to the men with him; "It's not a hunting creature on worlds
where it's smaller. It's not likely to have turned deadly here. Come
on!"

He went forward over the singularly bouncy ground. The others followed.
It was to be noted that Hallet the engineer, avoided the huge harmless
creature more widely than most.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the mound which was the ship. Moran unlimbered his torch.
He said sardonically;

"This ship won't do anybody any good. It's old-style. That thick belt
around its middle was dropped a hundred years ago, and more." There was
an abrupt thickening of the cylindrical hull at the middle. There was an
equally abrupt thinning, again, toward the landing-fins. The sharpness
of the change was blurred over by the revolting ground-stuff growing
everywhere. "We're going to find that this wreck has been here a century
at least!"

Without orders, he turned on the torch. A four-foot flame of pure
blue-white leaped out. He touched its tip to the fungoid soil. Steam
leaped up. He used the flame like a gigantic scalpel, cutting a square a
yard deep in the whitish stuff, and then cutting it across and across to
destroy it. Thick fumes arose, and quiverings and shakings began. Black
creatures in their labyrinths of tunnels began to panic. Off to the
right the blanket-like surface ripped and they poured out. They scuttled
crazily here and there. Some took to wing. By instinct the other
men--the armed ones--moved back from the smoke. They wore space-helmets
but they felt that there should be an intolerable smell.

Moran slashed and slashed angrily with the big flame, cutting a way to
the metal hull that had fallen here before his grandfather was born.
Sometimes the flame cut across things that writhed, and he was sickened.
But above all he raged because he was to be marooned here. He could not
altogether blame the others. They couldn't land at any colonized world
with him on board without his being detected as an extra member of the
crew. His fate would then be sealed. But they also would be
investigated. Official queries would go across this whole sector of the
galaxy, naming five persons of such-and-such description and
such-and-such fingerprints, voyaging in a space-yacht of such-and-such
size and registration. The world they came from would claim them as
fugitives. They would be returned to it. They'd be executed.

Then Carol's voice came in his helmet-phone. She cried out;

"_Look out! It's coming! Kill it! Kill it--._"

He heard blast-rifles firing. He heard Burleigh pant commands. He was on
his way out of the hollow he'd carved when he heard Harper cry out
horribly.

He got clear of the newly burned-away stuff. There was still much smoke
and stream. But he saw Harper. More, he saw the thing that had Harper.

It occurred to him instantly that if Harper died, there would not be too
many people on the _Nadine_. They need not maroon him. In fact, they
wouldn't dare.

A ship that came in to port with two few on board would be investigated
as thoroughly as one that had too many. Perhaps more thoroughly. So if
Harper were killed, Moran would be needed to take his place. He'd go on
from here in the _Nadine_, necessarily accepted as a member of her crew.

Then he rushed, the flame-torch making a roaring sound.


II.

They went back to the _Nadine_ for weapons more adequate for
encountering the local fauna when it was over. Blast-rifles were not
effective against such creatures as these. Torches were contact weapons
but they killed. Blast-rifles did not. And Harper needed to pull himself
together again, too. Also, neither Moran nor any of the others wanted to
go back to the still un-entered wreck while the skinny, somehow
disgusting legs of the thing still kicked spasmodically--quite
separate--on the whitish ground-stuff. Moran had disliked such creatures
in miniature form on other worlds. Enlarged like this.

It seemed insane that such creatures, even in miniature, should
painstakingly be brought across light-years of space to the new worlds
men settled on. But it had been found to be necessary. The ecological
system in which human beings belonged had turned out to be infinitely
complicated. It had turned out, in fact, to be the ecological system of
Earth, and unless all parts of the complex were present, the total was
subtly or glaringly wrong. So mankind distastefully ferried pests as
well as useful creatures to its new worlds as they were made ready for
settlement. Mosquitos throve on the inhabited globes of the Rim Stars.
Roaches twitched nervous antennae on the settled planets of the
Coal-sack. Dogs on Antares had fleas, and scratched their bites, and
humanity spread through the galaxy with an attendant train of insects
and annoyances. If they left their pests behind, the total system of
checks and balances which make life practical would get lopsided. It
would not maintain itself. The vagaries that could result were admirably
illustrated in and on the landscape outside the _Nadine_. Something had
been left out of the seeding of this planet. The element--which might be
a bacterium or a virus or almost anything at all--the element that kept
creatures at the size called "normal" was either missing or inoperable
here. The results were not desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper drank thirstily. Carol had watched from the control-room. She was
still pale. She looked strangely at Moran.

"You're sure it didn't get through your suit?" Burleigh asked
insistently of Harper.

Moran said sourly;

"The creatures have changed size. There's no proof they've changed
anything else. Beetles live in tunnels they make in fungus growths. The
beetles and the tunnels are larger, but that's all. Inchworms travel as
they always did. They move yards instead of inches, but that's all.
Centipedes--"

"It was--" said Carol unsteadily. "It was thirty feet long!"

"Centipedes," repeated Moran, "catch prey with their legs. They always
did. Some of them trail poison from their feet. We can play a blowtorch
over Harper's suit and any poison will be burned away. You can't burn a
space-suit!"

"We certainly can't leave Moran here!" said Burleigh uneasily.

"He kept Harper from being killed!" said Carol. "Your blast-rifles
weren't any good. The--creatures are hard to kill."

"Very hard to kill," agreed Moran. "But I'm not supposed to kill them.
I'm supposed to live with them! I wonder how we can make them understand
they're not supposed to kill me either?"

"I'll admit," said Burleigh, "that if you'd let Harper get killed, we'd
have been forced to let you take his identity and not be marooned, to
avoid questions at the space-port on Loris. Not many men would have done
what you did."

"Oh, I'm a hero," said Moran. "Noble Moran, that's me! What the hell
would you want me to do? I didn't think! I won't do it again. I
promise!"

The last statement was almost true. Moran felt a squeamish horror at the
memory of what he'd been through over by the wrecked ship. He'd come
running out of the excavation he'd made. He had for weapon a four-foot
blue-white flame, and there was a monstrous creature running directly
toward him, with Harper lifted off the ground and clutched in two
gigantic, spidery legs. It was no less than thirty feet long, but it was
a centipede. It travelled swiftly on grisly, skinny, pipe-thin legs. It
loomed over Moran as he reached the surface and he automatically thrust
the flame at it. The result was shocking. But the nervous systems of
insects are primitive. It is questionable that they feel pain. It is
certain that separated parts of them act as if they had independent
life. Legs--horrible things--sheared off in the flame of the torch, but
the grisly furry thing rushed on until Moran slashed across its body
with the blue-white fire. Then it collapsed. But Harper was still held
firmly and half the monster struggled mindlessly to run on while
another part was dead. Moran fought it almost hysterically, slicing off
legs and wanting to be sick when their stumps continued to move as if
purposefully, and the legs themselves kicked and writhed rhythmically.
But he bored in and cut at the body and ultimately dragged Harper clear.

Afterward, sickened, he completed cutting it to bits with the torch. But
each part continued nauseatingly to move. He went back with the others
to the _Nadine_. The blast-rifles had been almost completely without
effect upon the creature because of its insensitive nervous system.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think," said Burleigh, "that it is only fair for us to lift from here
and find a better part of this world to land Moran in."

"Why not another planet?" asked Carol.

"It could take weeks," said Burleigh harassedly. "We left Coryus three
days ago. We ought to land on Loris before too long. There'd be
questions asked if we turned up weeks late! We can't afford that! The
space-port police would suspect us of all sorts of things. They might
decide to check back on us where we came from. We can't take the time to
hunt another planet!"

"Then your best bet," said Moran caustically, "is to find out where we
are. You may be so far from Loris that you can't make port without
raising questions anyhow. But you might be almost on course. I don't
know! But let's see if that wreck can tell us. I'll go by myself if you
like."

He went into the airlock, where his suit and the others had been sprayed
with a corrosive solution while the outside air was pumped out and new
air from inside the yacht admitted. He got into the suit. Harper joined
him.

"I'm going with you," he said shortly. "Two will be safer than
one,--both with torches."

"Too, too true!" said Moran sardonically.

He bundled the other suits out of the airlock and into the ship. He
checked his torch. He closed the inner lock door and started the pump.
Harper said;

"I'm not going to try to thank you--."

"Because," Moran snapped, "you wouldn't have been on this planet to be
in danger if I hadn't tried to capture the yacht. I know it!"

"That wasn't what I meant to say!" protested Harper.

Moran snarled at him. The lock-pump stopped and the ready-for exit light
glowed. They pushed open the outer door and emerged. Again there was the
discordant, almost intolerable din. It made no sense. The cries and
calls and stridulations they now knew to be those of insects had no
significance. The unseen huge creatures made them without purpose.
Insects do not challenge each other like birds or make mating-calls like
animals. They make noises because it is their nature. The noises have no
meaning. The two men started toward the wreck to which Moran had partly
burned a passageway. There were clickings from underfoot all around
them. Moran said abruptly;

"Those clicks come from the beetles in their tunnels underfoot. They're
practically a foot long. How big do you suppose bugs grow here,--and
why?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Harper did not answer. He carried a flame-torch like the one Moran had
used before. They went unsteadily over the elastic, yielding stuff
underfoot. Harper halted, to look behind. Carol's voice came in the
helmet-phones.

"_We're watching out for you. We'll try to warn you if--anything shows
up._"

"Better watch me!" snapped Moran. "If I should kill Harper after all,
you might have to pass me for him presently!"

He heard a small, inarticulate sound, as if Carol protested. Then he
heard an angry shrill whine. He'd turned aside from the direct line to
the wreck. Something black, the size of a fair-sized dog, faced him
belligerently. Multiple lensed eyes, five inches across, seemed to
regard him in a peculiarly daunting fashion. The creature had a narrow,
unearthly, triangular face, with mandibles that worked from side to side
instead of up and down like an animal's jaws. The head was utterly
unlike any animal such as breed and raise their young and will fight for
them. There was a small thorax, from which six spiny, glistening legs
sprang. There was a bulbous abdomen.

"This," said Moran coldly, "is an ant. I've stepped on them for no
reason, and killed them. I've probably killed many times as many without
knowing it. But this could kill me."

The almost yard-long enormity standing two and a half feet high, was in
the act of carrying away a section of one of the legs of the giant
centipede Moran had killed earlier. It still moved. The leg was many
times the size of the ant. Moran moved toward it. It made a louder
buzzing sound, threatening him.

Moran cut it apart with a slashing sweep of the flame that a
finger-touch sent leaping from his torch. The thing presumably died, but
it continued to writhe senselessly.

"I killed this one," said Moran savagely, "because I remembered
something from my childhood. When one ant finds something to eat and
can't carry it all away, it brings back its friends to get the rest.
The big thing I killed would be such an item. How'd you like to have a
horde of these things about us? Come on!"

Through his helmet-phone he heard Harper breathing harshly. He led the
way once more toward the wreck.

       *       *       *       *       *

Black beetles swarmed about when he entered the cut in the mould-yeast
soil. They popped out of tunnels as if in astonishment that what had
been subterranean passages suddenly opened to the air. Harper stepped on
one, and it did not crush. It struggled frantically and he almost fell.
He gasped. Two of the creatures crawled swiftly up the legs of Moran's
suit, and he knocked them savagely away. He found himself grinding his
teeth in invincible revulsion.

They reached the end of the cut he'd made in the fungus-stuff. Metal
showed past burned-away soil. Moran growled;

"You keep watch. I'll finish the cut."

The flame leaped out. Dense clouds of smoke and steam poured out and up.
With the intolerably bright light of the torch overwhelming the
perpetual grayness under the clouds and playing upon curling vapors, the
two space-suited men looked like figures in some sort of inferno.

Carol's voice came anxiously into Moran's helmet-phone;

"_Are you all right?_"

"So far, both of us," said Moran sourly. "I've just uncovered the crack
of an airlock door."

He swept the flame around again. A mass of undercut fungus toppled
toward him. He burned it and went on. He swept the flame more widely.
There was carbonized matter from the previously burned stuff on the
metal, but he cleared all the metal. Carol's voice again;

"_There's something flying.... It's huge! It's a wasp!
It's--monstrous!_"

Moran growled;

"Harper, we're in a sort of trench. If it hovers, you'll burn it as it
comes down. Cut through its waist. It won't crawl toward us along the
trench. It'd have to back toward us to use its sting."

He burned and burned, white light glaring upon a mass of steam and smoke
which curled upward and looked as if lightning-flashes played within it.

Carol's voice;

"_It--went on past.... It was as big as a cow!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran wrenched at the port-door. It partly revolved. He pulled. It fell
outward. The wreck was not standing upright on its fins. It lay on its
side. The lock inside the toppled-out port was choked with a horrible
mass of thread-like fungi. Moran swept the flame in. The fungus
shriveled and was not. He opened the inner lock-door. There was pure
blackness within. He held the torch for light.

For an instant everything was confusion, because the wreck was lying on
its side instead of standing in a normal position. Then he saw a sheet
of metal, propped up to be seen instantly by anyone entering the wrecked
space-vessel.

Letters burned into the metal gave a date a century and a half old.
Straggly torch-writing said baldly;

     "_This ship the Malabar crashed here on Tethys II a week ago. We
     cannot repair. We are going on to Candida III in the boats. We are
     carrying what bessendium we can with us. We resign salvage rights
     in this ship to its finders, but we have more bessendium with us.
     We will give that to our rescuers._

     "_Jos. White, Captain._"

Moran made a peculiar, sardonic sound like a bark.

"Calling the _Nadine_!" he said in mirthless amusement. "This planet is
Tethys Two. Do you read me? Tethys II! Look it up!"

A pause. Then Carol's voice, relieved;

"_Tethys is in the Directory! That's good!_" There was the sound of
murmurings in the control-room behind her. "_Yes!... Oh,--wonderful!
It's not far off the course we should have followed! We won't be
suspiciously late at Loris! Wonderful!_"

"I share your joy," said Moran sarcastically. "More information! The
ship's name was the _Malabar_. She carried bessendium among her cargo.
Her crew went on to Candida III a hundred and fifty years ago, leaving a
promise to pay in more bessendium whoever should rescue them. More
bessendium! Which suggests that some bessendium was left behind."

Silence. The bald memorandum left behind the vanished crew was, of
course, pure tragedy. A ship's lifeboat could travel four light-years,
or possibly even six. But there were limits. A castaway crew had left
this world on a desperate journey to another in the hope that life there
would be tolerable. If they arrived, they waited for some other ship to
cross the illimitable emptiness and discover either the beacon here or
one they'd set up on the other world. The likelihood was small, at best.
It had worked out zero. If the lifeboats made Candida III, their crews
stayed there because they could go no farther. They'd died there,
because if they'd been found this ship would have been visited and its
cargo salvaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran went inside. He climbed through the compartments of the toppled
craft, using his torch for light. He found where the cargo-hold had been
opened from the living part of the ship. He saw the cargo. There were
small, obviously heavy boxes in one part of the hold. Some had been
broken open. He found scraps of purple bessendium ore dropped while
being carried to the lifeboats. A century and a half ago it had not
seemed worth while to pick them up, though bessendium was the most
precious material in the galaxy. It couldn't be synthesized. It had to
be made by some natural process not yet understood, but involving
long-continued pressures of megatons to the square inch with
temperatures in the millions of degrees. It was purple. It was
crystalline. Fractions of it in blocks of other metals made the
fuel-blocks that carried liners winging through the void. But here were
pounds of it dropped carelessly....

Moran gathered a double handful. He slipped it in a pocket of his
space-suit. He went clambering back to the lock.

He heard the roaring of a flame-torch. He found Harper playing it
squeamishly on the wriggling fragments of another yard-long ant. It had
explored the trench burned out of the fungus soil and down to the rock.
Harper'd killed it as it neared him.

"That's three of them I've killed," said Harper in a dogged voice.
"There seem to be more."

"Did you hear my news?" asked Moran sardonically.

"Yes," said Harper. "How'll we get back to the _Nadine_?"

"Oh, we'll fight our way through," said Moran, as sardonically as
before. "We'll practice splendid heroism, giving battle to ants who
think we're other ants trying to rob them of some fragments of an
over-sized dead centipede. A splendid cause to fight for, Harper!"

He felt an almost overpowering sense of irony. The quantity of
bessendium he'd seen was riches incalculable. The mere pocketfull of
crystals in his pocket would make any man wealthy if he could get to a
settled planet and sell them. And there was much, much more back in the
cargo-hold of the wreck. He'd seen it.

But his own situation was unchanged. Bessendium could be hidden
somehow,--perhaps between the inner and outer hulls of the _Nadine_. But
it was not possible to land the _Nadine_ at any space-port with an extra
man aboard her. In a sense, Moran might be one of the richest men in the
galaxy in his salvagers' right to the treasure in the wrecked
_Malabar's_ hold. But he could not use that treasure to buy his way to
a landing on a colonized world.

Carol's voice; she was frightened.

"_Something's coming! It's--terribly big! It's coming out of the mist!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran pushed past Harper in the trench that ended at the wreck's
lock-door. He moved on until he could see over the edge of that trench
as it shallowed. Now there were not less than forty of the giant ants
about the remnants of the monstrous centipede Moran had killed. They
moved about in great agitation. There was squabbling. Angry, whining
stridulations filled the air beneath the louder and more gruesome sounds
from fartheraway places. It appeared that scouts and foragers from two
different ant-cities had come upon the treasure of dead--if
twitching--meat of Moran's providing. They differed about where the
noisesome booty should be taken. Some ants pulled angrily against each
other, whining shrilly. He saw individual ants running frantically away
in two different directions. They would be couriers, carrying news of
what amounted to a frontier incident in the city-state civilization of
the ants.

Then Moran saw the giant thing of which Carol spoke. It was truly huge,
and it had a gross, rounded body, and a ridiculously small thorax, and
its head was tiny and utterly mild in expression. It walked with an
enormous, dainty deliberation, placing small spiked feet at the end of
fifteen-foot legs very delicately in place as it moved. Its eyes were
multiple and huge, and its forelegs though used so deftly for walking
had a horrifying set of murderous, needle-sharp saw-teeth along their
edges.

It looked at the squabbling ants with its gigantic eyes that somehow
appeared like dark glasses worn by a monstrosity. It moved primly,
precisely toward them. Two small black creatures tugged at a hairy
section of a giant centipede's leg. The great pale-green creature--a
mantis; a praying mantis twenty feet tall in its giraffe-like walking
position--the great creature loomed over them, looking down as through
sunglasses. A foreleg moved like lightning. An ant weighing nearly as
much as a man stridulated shrilly, terribly, as it was borne aloft. The
mantis closed its arm-like forelegs upon it, holding it as if piously
and benignly contemplating it. Then it ate it, very much as a man might
eat an apple, without regard to the convulsive writhings of its victim.

       *       *       *       *       *

It moved on toward the denser fracas among the ants. Suddenly it raised
its ghastly saw-toothed forelegs in an extraordinary gesture. It was the
mantis's spectral attitude, which seemed a pose of holding out its arms
in benediction. But its eyes remained blind-seeming and
enigmatic,--again like dark glasses.

Then it struck. Daintily, it dined upon an ant. Upon another. Upon
another and another and another.

From one direction parties of agitated and hurrying black objects
appeared at the edge of the mist. They were ants of a special
caste,--warrior-ants with huge mandibles designed for fighting in
defense of their city and its social system and its claim to fragments
of dead centipedes. From another direction other parties of no less
truculent warriors moved with the swiftness and celerity of a striking
task-force. All the air was filled with the deep-bass notes of something
huge, booming beyond visibility, an