# The Message of the Stars
Author: Max Heindel
Category: 01_astrologia
Source: Gutenberg #18683
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:17:34.288335
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18683-h.htm or 18683-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/6/8/18683/18683-h/18683-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/6/8/18683/18683-h.zip)





RALPH GRANGER'S FORTUNES

by

WILLIAM PERRY BROWN

Illustrated By W. H. Fry







[Frontispiece: "Grandpa!" cried Ralph.  "You shall not shoot, I say!"]




Akron, Ohio
The Saalfield Publishing Co.
New York ---- 1902 ---- Chicago
Copyright, 1902,
by
The Saalfield Publishing Company




TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I.  Ending the Feud
    II.  Ralph and his Grandfather
   III.  Ralph Continues his Journey
    IV.  The Moonshiners and the Railroad
     V.  Ralph's First Railroad Ride
    VI.  Ralph in Columbia
   VII.  An Enraged Photographer
  VIII.  Captain Shard's Proposal
    IX.  Ralph Arrives at Savannah
     X.  The Captain Talks with Ralph
    XI.  Aboard the Curlew
   XII.  The Curlew Puts to Sea
  XIII.  A Taste of Ship's Discipline
   XIV.  Bad Weather
    XV.  Boarded by a Cruiser
   XVI.  Nearing the Gold Coast
  XVII.  Up the River
 XVIII.  A Brush in the Wilderness
   XIX.  Left Behind
    XX.  Ralph Stumbles on a Discovery
   XXI.  At Close Quarters
  XXII.  Trouble of Another Kind
 XXIII.  Adrift
  XXIV.  Ralph's Sufferings
   XXV.  The Second Mate's Story
  XXVI.  Hard Times
 XXVII.  Uncle Gideon




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


   "Grandpa!" cried Ralph. "You shall not shoot, I say!" . . . . . . . . .
   _Frontispiece_

   "Mr. Duff," said Gary in his most grating tones, "who gave you the
   authority to interfere with my designs regarding this insolent
   youngster?"

   Ralph's Winchester cracked and the raised arm fell shattered and
   useless.

   "Quick, Ralph, pull me through by the arms."




Ralph Granger's Fortunes.


CHAPTER I.

Ending the Feud.

"Must I do it, grandpa?"

"Of course you must!  I'm afraid you ain't a true Granger, Ralph, or
you wouldn't ask no such question."

"But why should I do it, grandpa?"

"Listen at the boy."

The sharp-eyed, grizzled old man rose from his seat before the fire,
and took down an ancient looking, muzzle loading rifle from over the
cabin door.

"I'll tell you why."

He patted the gun, now lying across his knees.

"This here was your father's gun.  He carried it for many years.  I had
it when the feud betwixt the Grangers and the Vaughns first began.  He
had it with him when he was shot down at the Laurel Branch by John
Vaughn, just six years ago today."

"Today is my birthday," commented Ralph, a sturdy-limbed, ruddy-faced
lad.

"And you are fifteen.  Think of that; 'most a man.  I said I'd wait
till you was fifteen, and as it happens, his son's a goin' to mill
today."

"What of that?"

"You just wait and you'll see.  All you've got to do is to obey orders."

The old man got up, took down a leather shot pouch, and proceeded to
load the rifle carefully.  After which he slung the pouch and a powder
horn round Ralph's neck, then went out and looked at the sun.

He returned, placed the rifle in the lad's hands, and bade him follow.
Taking their hats they went out of the house.

Steep mountain ridges cut off any extended view.  An old field or two
lay about them, partially in the narrow creek bottom and partially
climbing the last rugged slopes.

There was a foot log across the little brawling brook, beyond which the
public road wound deviously down the glen towards the far distant
lowlands.

Ralph eyed the unusually stern expression of his grandfather's face
dubiously as they trudged along the road.

Bras Granger was all of sixty-five years old, dried and toughened by
toil, exposure, and vindictive broodings, until he resembled a
cross-grained bit of time-hardened oak.  His gait, though shambling,
was rapid for one of his age.

"You said you'd tell me why," suggested Ralph, as they wound their way
along the crooked road.

"Didn't I say that the son of the man as killed your father was comin'
by the Laurel Branch this mornin'?  Haven't the Vaughns and the
Grangers been at outs for more than twenty year?  What more d'ye want?"

The boy frowned, but it was in perplexity rather than wrath.

They came at last to a wooded hollow, through which another creek ran,
thickly shaded by thick overhanging shrubbery.  The old man led the way
to a half decayed log of immense size, that lay behind a thick fringe
of bushes, at an angle just beyond where the road crossed the creek.

It was a deadly spot for an ambuscade.

"Lay down behind that log," said old Granger.  "Now, can you draw a
good bead on him when he comes in sight?"

Young Granger squinted along the rifle barrel, now resting across the
log.  Though apparently concealed himself, he had a fair view of the
road for sixty yards in both directions.  Where it entered the brook it
was barely thirty feet away.

"Take him right forninst the left shoulder, 'bout the time his mule
crosses the creek; then your poor father'll rest easy in his grave."

"Why ain't you killed him afore?" demanded Ralph.

"My hand hasn't been steady these nine year; not since them Vaughns
burned our house down the night your grandmother died.  It was cold and
snowin', and bein' out in it was more'n she could stand."

"I remember," said the boy gloomily.  "But that was a long time ago.  I
can't stay mad nine year."

"I'm madder now than I was then!" almost shouted the infuriated
mountaineer.  "After they got your pap, I 'lowed I'd wait 'twel you was
fifteen.  Then you'd be big enough to know how sweet revenge is.  Heap
sweeter than sugar, ain't it?"

"Hark?" interjected Ralph, without replying.  "Some one is comin' up
the road."

A trample of hoofs became audible, and presently a man mounted on a
mule, with a sack of corn under him, was to be seen approaching the
ambuscade.

Seated before him was a child of perhaps four or five, who laughed and
prattled to the man's evident delight.  Old Granger's eyes shown with a
ferocious joy.

"That's him!" he exclaimed in tremulously eager tones.  "He's got his
brat along.  I wish ye could get 'em both, then there'd be an end of
the miserable brood for one while.  Wait, boy--wait 'twel he gets to
the creek afore ye shoot.  Think of your poor pap, when ye draw bead."

But Ralph's face did not betoken any kindred enthusiasm.  He was tired
to death of hearing about the everlasting feud between the families.

If the Vaughns had fought the Grangers, it was equally certain that the
Grangers had been no whit behind in sanguinary reprisals.  He
remembered seeing this same Jase Vaughn, now riding unsuspectingly
toward the loaded rifle, at a corn shucking once.  Ralph then thought
him a very jolly, amusing fellow.

"Now lad--now lad!" whispered the old man.  "Get down and take your
sight.  I've seen ye shoot the heads offn squirrels.  Just imagine that
feller's head is a squirrel's.  As for the child----"

"Grandpa, I will not shoot.  It would be murder.  I'll meet him fair
and square, though, and if he's sorry for what his father done, I'll
let it pass.  He couldn't help it anyhow, if he wanted to, I reckon."

To the old man's intense disgust, Ralph leaped lightly over the log and
advanced into the road, rifle in hand.  His grandfather followed him,
raving in his futile rage.

"Hello!" exclaimed Jase Vaughn, thrusting his hand behind him quickly.
"Here's old Granger and his son's kid.  I wish you was at home, Clelly."

This last to his boy who, not at all alarmed, was smiling at Ralph in a
very friendly manner.

When the lad saw Jase throw back his hand, he dropped his rifle into
the hollow of his left arm and brought the trigger to a half cock,
advancing at the same time squarely into the middle of the road.

"Grandpa tells me that you are the son of the man who shot my father,
here, just six years ago," began the boy.  "I knew it myself, but I
didn't 'low you was to blame, 'less you uphilt him in it."

"Suppose I do; what then?" Jase eyed the two Grangers steadily, though
not in anger as far as Ralph could see.

"Then we'll settle it right here," said the latter firmly.  "I could
have shot you from the bushes, as your father did mine, but I wouldn't."

"The more fool you!" hissed the vindictive old man.  "I ought to have
kept the gun myself."

"Suppose I don't uphold the deed?" added Vaughn, still totally
undisturbed.

"Then you can go, for all of me.  I'm sick of the feud."

"Shake my boy!"  Jase held out a large brown paw.  "So am I.  If I
could 'a' had my way your pap never would a been killed."

Ralph hesitated an instant, when suddenly little Clelly reached forth
his small, chubby fingers, and the boy surrendered.  He suffered Vaughn
to shake his hand, then frankly took the child's and pressed it warmly.

"I like 'oo," cried the little fellow, whereat Jase gave a great horse
laugh of undisguised satisfaction.

"These young uns has got more sense than all of us older fools,"
exclaimed the gratified father.  "Ain't that so, old man?" he added,
looking at the elder Granger.

But the face of Ralph's grandfather became convulsed with a sudden
fury.  He rushed upon Ralph with a celerity unlocked for in one so old,
and wrenched the rifle from the boy's hands.

Then he turned upon Jase Vaughn who had witnessed this action in
astonishment.

"Now," shouted old Granger, "reckon I'll get even for the loss of my
son.  Here's at ye!"

"Grandpa!" cried Ralph, springing between the old man and his intended
victim.  "You shall not shoot, I say!"

"Out of my way, you renegade," retorted the other leveling his gun.

As the cap snapped, Ralph struck up the barrel, and was rewarded by a
furious imprecation from the aged but relentless relative.




CHAPTER II

Ralph and His Grandfather.

Meanwhile Jase Vaughn sat on his mule looking quietly on, as if he were
entirely unconcerned in the result of the struggle between Ralph and
his grandfather.

Old Granger, finding himself baffled, flung down the rifle upon the
ground and strode off up the road, muttering wildly to himself like one
demented.

"Hold on, grandpa!" shouted Ralph, picking up the gun.  "I'll be with
you in a minute."

But the old man heeded not, and soon disappeared round a bend of the
road in the direction of his home.

"He's too old to change," said Jase.  "But I really don't see any
reason why you and me should keep up this foolishness.  If my father
shot yourn, thar was a cousin of your father's fought a duel with my
dad 'way down in Georgy.  Both on 'em were hurt so bad they never
walked again."

"We heard of it," returned Ralph, "and I couldn't help thinking at the
time what fools our families were to keep up a feud started, I reckon,
by our great grandfathers."

"Right, you are, young feller.  Hit all come of doggin' hogs outn a
sweet tater patch; so I've heard."

"Then there was a row, I reckon."

"Yes.  One word brought on another, till at last some one got hurt,
then the shootin' begun.  I never did take much to the business myself,
but somehow I didn't have the energy to set the thing straight.  I'm
powerful glad ye done what ye have done today, and I passes you my word
that Jase Vaughn has done with the feud as well as you."

This time it was Ralph's turn to offer his hand.  After another hearty
shake little Clell threw himself upon the lad's neck with childish
abandon.

"I like 'oo!" he cried again.

"Well, I swow!" exclaimed Jase.  "He's takin' a plum likin' to you.
But we must be gettin' on.  If ever I can do anything for you, don't
'low my bein' a Vaughn keep you from lettin' me know."

Then Jase clucked to his mule and rode away, with little Clell craning
his neck to catch a last glimpse of Ralph, who, shouldering his rifle,
began to retrace his steps towards home.

As he proceeded his face grew grave.  How would his incensed relative
receive him?

Since the grandmother's and his father's death Ralph and the old man
had lived principally by themselves.  The boy's own mother had died
when he was a baby.  Now and then some woman would be hired to do some
house-work, usually the wife or daughter of some tenant to whom Bras
Granger rented a portion of his land.  But they seldom remained long,
and Ralph had, perforce, to take their place from time to time.

He grew as expert at cooking and other simple household duties as he
was at shooting, trapping, and similar mountain accomplishments.  Thus
the two had lived on together, with little outside society, relying
mainly on themselves for diversion as well as support.

The maintenance of the feud was the old man's greatest wish.  It was as
meat and drink to his soul.

When Ralph showed the indifference he often felt on that subject, his
grandfather always flew into a rage.

"To think that my only living descendant should go back on the family,
is too much to bear," he said.  "There's only nephews and cousins
'sides you, Ralph.  They are scattered here and yonder; they ain't a
carin' much about the family honor.  Hit all depends on you, boy.  I
wonder your pap's ghost ain't a haantin' you for bein' so careless."

Then Ralph would vaguely promise to do better, and the subject would be
dropped, only to crop up again whenever the old man felt more savagely
inclined than usual.  Today, however, was the first time that the two
had come to an open and violent rupture.

When the boy came in sight of the cabin he beheld his grandparent
seated in the doorway absorbed, apparently in deep reflection.

Ralph crossed the foot log, opened the gate and walked up to the door.

"I am sorry I displeased you today," he began, "but I just couldn't do
what you wanted me to do----"

"Shet your mouth!" interrupted Granger harshly.  "You are a disgrace to
your kin.  I never would a believed it if my eyes hadn't a seen and my
ears a heard.  You are no longer a grandson of mine.  D'ye hear?"

Ralph's perplexed and distressed look seemed to again infuriate the old
man.

"Pack up your traps and get outn here!" he raged, brandishing his
walking stick.  "My house is no longer a home for such as you."

"Wh--where shall I go?" asked Ralph, still dazed over this astounding
outcome of the Vaughn incident.

"Mebbe you'd better go over to Jase Vaughn's," sneered old Granger.
"His father killed yourn, but you don't care for such a little thing as
that."

"Grandpa," cried Ralph, stung to indignation at last, "it is cruel of
you to treat me so, simply because I wouldn't commit murder.
Yes--murder.  I say it would have been murder!  I'm no coward; and it
is cowardly to shoot down a man and him not knowing."

"You reprobate!" gasped the obdurate old mountaineer.  "I've a notion
to thrash you--right here."

He again shook his cane and glared his hatred of Ralph's conduct.  But
the boy only said:

"I'd rather you beat me than do what I always would be miserable over.
Let's drop it, grandpa."

He passed into the cabin and observed a small pile of clothing on the
floor.

"There's your duds, boy," said Bras Granger grimly.  "Pick 'em up and
pull your freight outn here."

Ralph surveyed the old man curiously; but as he noted the latter's
stern, unyielding aspect he said no more until he had rolled up a clean
shirt and a pair of socks.  A tear or two fell as he tied the bundle in
a large handkerchief.

"Am I to take the gun?" asked he, gulping down his emotion as best he
could.

"No!" almost shouted the old man.  "What business you got with a gun?
Come now; are you ready?"

Ralph nodded; his heart was too full to speak.

The old man stood aside and pointed to the door.  Ralph held out his
hand.

"Good by," he managed to falter forth.  "May God forgive you for
turnin' me out this day."

He passed through the yard, feeling for the gate, for his eyes were dim
with moisture.  Crossing the foot log, he walked on until he came to a
rise of ground just where the road made a sudden turn.

Then he wheeled, dashed the tears away, and took a last look at the
place where he was born and had always lived.

Shut in by wild and rugged mountains, far from the world's great life,
humble and homely, it was still the only place on earth where the
orphaned lad had felt that he had any natural right to be.  And now,
even this slender thread had been rudely severed by his nearest living
relative.

"Good-by, old home," said he audibly, as he waved his hand in a
farewell gesture.  "I hate to leave you when it comes to the pinch, but
if I live I'll make my way somewhere's else.  There's other places
beside these mountains where a boy can get on, I know."

He resumed his way, forcing back the tears, and soon found his emotions
subside.

A conviction that he had acted right throughout the altercation with
old Bras, helped him to bear more cheerfully the hard fact that he was
not only homeless but almost moneyless.  This last misfortune did not
press on him heavily, as in that secluded region people were
universally hospitable.  Ralph had never paid for a meal or a night's
lodging in his life.

As he happened to take an easterly course he kept it merely because it
would lead him to the lowlands and the towns as quickly as any other
route.

He had at once resolved to leave his native mountains.  Inexperienced
as he was, he instinctively felt that there were better things in store
for an energetic lad in other parts of the country than he would be apt
to find anywhere near his home.

He struck a lively pace and had walked nearly a mile, with his bundle
under his arm, when he met Jase Vaughn returning from the mill.

"Hello, youngster!" quoth that worthy man as cordially as if Ralph and
himself had been warm friends all along.  "Where you carryin' yourself
to?  Old man got in good humor yet?"

"He has turned me out, lock, stock, and barrel," replied the boy,
swallowing his pride in this humiliating confession.

"W-h-a-a-t?" ejaculated Jase thoroughly amazed, while Clell smiled at
Ralph in a most amiable manner.

"Grandpa was so provoked because I declined to obey him," said Ralph,
"that he told me to pack up and get out."

"For good and all?"

"Yes, for good.  At least I sh'an't go back any more--unless--he was to
send for me."

"Bully for you!  I wouldn't either.  Give you the shake 'cause you
wouldn't let him put a bullet hole through me!  Well, I swow!"

Jase stared at Ralph in mingled admiration and compassion.

"The dadburned old fool!" he continued.  "'Scuse me, Ralph, no
reflections on your fambly, but hit kind o' teches my feelin's to see
you fired in this shape, long o' your actin' the gentleman with me.
Where be you goin'?"

"Somewhere's down below; I don't know exactly where."

"Got any money?"

"A little.  I'm going to hunt work; then I'll soon make more.  I
sha'n't stay in the mountains."

Jase drew forth a greasy leather wallet and extracted a five dollar
bill, which he eyed reflectively as if forcing himself to make up his
mind, then suddenly handed it to Ralph, who thanked him but shook his
head.

"Dang it!  Let me loan it to you then.  Didn't you as good as save my
life?  Look, Clell wants you to take it, don't you, Clell?"

The little fellow laughed, seized the bill from his father's hand, and
tossed it towards Ralph, saying:

"Take it; take it.  I like 'oo, Walph."

Ralph felt another rising in his throat as he stooped to pick up the
note; but he could not bring himself to the point of accepting so great
a favor from one of the Vaughns.

"I--I really don't need it," said he.  "Hold on!  Jase!  Do hold up a
minute."

"Can't, old feller," called back Jase, who had suddenly spurred his
mule into a trot when he saw the note in Ralph's hand.  "Pay me when
you get back, if you'd rather."

"But I say!  I can't keep this money----"

"Good by," came floating back on the breeze.  "I don't know nothin'
'bout no money.  Take good care of yourself."

Then Jase, boy, and mule, whipped round a crook of the road and were
seen no more.

Ralph's first impulse was to throw the bill away.  But sober second
thoughts prevailed, and somewhat reluctantly he placed it with the rest
of his slender stock of cash.

"Jase means well," thought he, resuming his tramp.  "I don't know that
either of us are to blame 'cause our families have been at outs for so
long.  When I get to making something I'll send it back."

All that day Ralph trudged manfully on.  At times grief would be
uppermost in his heart when he thought of the way in which his
grandfather had treated him.

Once, as he passed a cabin where a boy of about his own age stood
washing his hands on the porch, and he caught a glimpse of a cheerful
interior, with dinner smoking on the table, he felt very homesick.  He
wished he was back, preparing his grandpa's noonday meal.

As he did not feel hungry he did not stop anywhere until about sunset,
when he walked up to a double penned house that looked roomy and
hospitable.  Several dogs ran out barking.

"Here, you Boss!  Git out'n thar, Louder!  Pick up a stick and frail
the nation outn 'em, boy."

A tall, shock headed, awkward man had come onto the porch and was
making these remarks with great vigor but entire good nature.  The dogs
subsided, and Ralph ran lightly up the steps.

"Come in.  Take a chair by the fire.  What mought your name be these
hard times?"

"I'm Ralph Granger, from over about Hiawassee Gap."

"Son of old Bras?"

Ralph assented, when the shock headed man called to his wife, who was
sifting meal for the supper:

"Tildy this must be one of your kin folks." Then, turning to Ralph, "My
wife was a Granger; one of the Gregory branch.  Well, tell us all about
yourself.  Don't mind the children, they always are in the way, anyhow."

Ralph, finding that he was among friends, related briefly the events of
the day and wound up by again expressing his detestation of the feud.
Mr. Dopples, for that was the shock headed man's name, nodded approval.

"We mountain folks live too much outn the world," said he.  "What you
goin' to do?"

"Anything honest, to make a living.  I'm not going to stay in these
parts though."

"If you've any notion of goin' down about Columbia, I can direct you to
a friend of mine as lives there.  Comes up here every summer to fish
and hunt.  Got lots of coin, and is always wantin' me to go down there
and take a regular town spree with him.  Oh he's a sight!"

"What is his name?  I don't suppose he would care anything about me.
He never heard of me, anyhow."

"Name is Captain Shard; he keeps a big livery stable.  You just tell
him you're a friend of mine, and I'll bet my steers agin a coon skin
you're at home straight."

Soon after supper Ralph was shown to his bed in a shed room at the rear
of the house.  In the mountains the people go to bed and rise early
from habit.

Before eight o'clock a sound of heavy breathing could be heard from
every room.  Under the floor the very dogs were steeped in dreams of
coon and 'possum hunting.

Suddenly Ralph awoke, feeling a pressure on his chest.  The room was
not so dark but that he could detect a shadowy figure at the bedside.

A prickly chill ran through his veins, but before he could speak, a
voice whispered:

"Give me your hand," and as the boy dazely obeyed, the pressure on his
chest was removed as another hand was lifted from there, that firmly
grasped his own.

"I can feel your pulse jump; you're skeered, Ralph."

"Wh--who are--you?" faltered Ralph, unable to make out as yet whether
it was a "haant" or a living person that had awakened him thus.

"Don't know me?"  There was a titter of nearly noiseless laughter.
"Felt me pressin' your chist, didn't you?"

"Yes.  At first I thought I must be stiflin', but----"

"If you want to wake a person 'thout speakin', you press on their
chist.  Hit always fetches 'em.  Don't you know me yet?"

Ralph murmured a low negative.

"Well, then, I'll tell you I'm----"

A sound of feet striking the floor heavily was heard from one of the
other rooms, and was followed by the voice of Mr. Dopples, calling out:

"Tildy!  Oh, Tildy!  Where be ye, Tildy?"




CHAPTER III.

Ralph Continues His Journey.

The form at Ralph's bedside grasped his hand again in a warning
pressure.

"Keep quiet," it said.  "I'm your Aunt Tildy.  I have something to say
to you by and by."

The figure vanished, and presently the lad heard his aunt say:

"What are you fussin' about, Mr. Dopples?  Can't a body stir 'thout you
havin' a fit?"

"I only wanted to know where ye were," was the shock headed man's
reply.  "What are ye progin' round this time o' night for?"

"Cause I want to.  Now shet up and go to sleep."

While Ralph was wondering what on earth his aunt, whom he had never
seen before, could want to say to him at such an hour, the talking in
the other room died away, and was succeeded soon by a resonant snoring,
that denoted Mr. Dopples' prompt obedience to his wife's last command.

Shortly thereafter she swept softly into the boy's room, wrapped in a
shawl and seated herself at his side.

"Are you awake?" she said in a whisper.

Ralph said, "Yes;" and propped himself in a listening attitude.

"You think strange, I reckon, at my comin' to you in this way," she
began.  "You've never seen and hardly ever heard of us before.  But
when I learned the way your grandpap have treated you, I felt sorry,
and I want to help you what little I can."

"I'm mightily obliged, aunt," replied Ralph, still puzzled how to
connect this friendly wish with the object of such a visit as she was
making tonight.

"Hit was a brother of mine as fought that fight with John Vaughn.  I
used to believe in the feud, but I don't now.  It's a wicked thing to
seek people's lives.  Both sides have suffered enough, Ralph, and I say
let there be peace."

"Amen," muttered the lad heartily.

"But what I wanted to let you know was about this Captain Shard, as
Dopples wants you to go and see.  My man never quarrels with
nobody--bless his old soul!  Therefore, he never 'spicious that any of
his friends would want to, either.  There's where he is wrong."

"Yes; but I don't see how that can apply to Captain Shard, whom I never
heard of before."

"I know you don't, but I do.  Captain Shard's mother was a Vaughn.
Now, do you see?"

"Good gracious!  But it seems to me as if that don't amount to much.
Why should this man want to hurt me?"

"Hold on.  This man Shard's mother was sister to the Vaughn who killed
your father, and whom my brother had fought on account of it.  Don't
you see?  When Shard learns who you are, his Vaughn blood is more than
apt to prompt him to do you some harm."

"They don't shoot people in the town the way we do in the mountains,
aunt.  I've read that the law is too strong for that."

"There's other ways of hurtin' a poor boy 'sides takin' a gun to him.
If he chose, he might harm you in other ways.  I've heard it said that
folks with plenty of money can do 'most anything in the city."

"Well, aunt, I'm much obliged to you for letting me know.  If I strike
Columbia, and meet up with Captain Shard, I shall certainly remember
what you say."

"Good night, then.  Don't tell Dopples what I've said.  He's a thinkin'
the world of Shard.  I like him, too; but then he don't know I'm a
Granger, I reckon."

After Mrs. Dopples retired, Ralph soon fell asleep.  When he wakened
again daylight was at hand, and Mr. Dopples was kindling a fire.

Breakfast came early, then Ralph bade his kindly friends farewell, and
resumed his journey as the sun was peeping over the easterly summits of
the Blue Ridge.

"Don't forget to see Shard," called the shock headed man, as the boy
reached the public road.  "He'll help you out."

"I may see Shard," thought Ralph; "but I'll be careful how he sees me.
I'm going to get out of the range of this feud if I have to travel
clear to the seacoast."

As he had a lunch along--given him by Mrs. Dopples--he did not stop
anywhere for dinner, but trudged resolutely on at a three mile an hour
gait.

His young limbs, hardened by constant mountain climbing, did not tire
readily, while his experience of traveling enabled him to keep the
general course he wished to go, notwithstanding the branch trails and
the many windings caused by the ruggedness of the country.

The latter portion of the afternoon was occupied in climbing a long
mountain range that overtopped most of the others in sight.  The sun
was nearly setting as he reached the summit; then he uttered an
exclamation of astonishment.

Behind him was a confused jumble of peaks and ridges as far as the eye
could reach.  It was the region he had left--his own native wilds.

Before him stretched an undulating panorama of plain, valley, and
gentle hills.  There were patches of woodland, great plantations with
here and there variegated spots that Ralph supposed to be villages.

It was his first view of the level country beyond the Blue Ridge, and
he surveyed it with intense interest.

"They say it stretches that way clear to the seacoast," he said to
himself as he began to descend the mountain.  "I don't see how they can
see any distance with no big ridges to look off from."

This idea--otherwise laughable--was perfectly natural to a lad who had
never seen anything but wild and rugged mountains in his life.

He quickened his pace, wishing to get down into the region of farms and
houses before darkness should come.  A rising cloud in the southeast
also occasioned him some concern.

"Looks mighty like there might be rain in that cloud," he thought.
"I've got matches, but I'd hate to have to spend a wet night out in
these woods."

The gun went down and the black south-easterly haze came up, with
semi-tropical celerity.  Ralph was still in the lonely region of forest
and crag, when a whirl of wind struck him in the face and a few drops
spattered on the leaves of the chestnuts around.

The brief southern twilight was blotted out almost at once by the
overspreading clouds, and young Granger became conscious that he had
somehow missed the trail.

"That is odd," he muttered.  "It was just here a minute ago."

Something like a yellow gleam caught his eye, and he plunged along in
its course in a reckless manner, for he was nervous with anxiety.

Being in a strange region, with a storm on the point of breaking, was
not pleasant even to older nerves, when added to the natural terrors of
a night in the woods, without any other company than one's brooding
thoughts.

"Hello!  What's this?" he exclaimed as he almost ran against an
obstruction that looked not unlike a steep house roof.

The odor of tar and resin pervaded the air.  Ralph groped his way
around it, feeling here and there with his hands.

"It's a tar kiln, sure as preaching!" ejaculated he, at length.  "There
ought to be some kind of a shack about, looks like."

He was still searching, when the wind, which had been increasing,
brought with it a sudden downpour of rain.  Ralph was about to rush for
a tree to shelter himself, when a flash of lightning lighted up the
kiln and surrounding objects with a pale, brief glare.

"Ha--there she is!" exclaimed Ralph, discovering the object of his
search.  "I almost knew the man as put up this kiln must have had a
shelter of some kind."

He made his way to a low, brush covered frame near by, arriving there
just in time.  The darkness was intense, except when cloven by the
lightning, while the fall of rain was drenching and furious.

The shack leaked some, but it was an immense improvement over a tree
for shelter.

"Let's see where we are, anyhow," said Ralph, producing some matches,
one of which he struck.  "Hello!  There are some pine knots.  Here's
luck at last."

In a few minutes he had a small fire blazing brightly, and felt more
like contemplating his surroundings with cheerful equanimity.

But as the rain increased, the leaks grew in number, threatening to put
out the fire, and converting the earth floor into a mushy mud puddle.

"I can't do any sleeping here," thought he.  "Might just as well make
up my mind for a night of it round this fire."

By dint of careful watching he kept his fire from going entirely out,
and managed to keep himself dry by picking out the spots where the
leaks were fewest in which to stand.

But it was a dreary, lonesome time.  The wind whistled dolefully
through the pines, and the rain splashed unmercifully upon the bark and
boughs of the shack.

After each flash of lightning, sharp peals of thunder added their harsh
echoes, until Ralph's ears ached, used as he was to mountain storms.
The rain began to slacken in an hour, while the wind gradually dwindled
to a light breeze.

Still there was no chance to lie down, and the boy was growing sleepy.

He had drooped his head between his knees as he sat on a pine block,
and was dropping into a doze when he heard something stirring at the
back of the shanty.  He looked around in a drowsy way, but seeing
nothing, he again fell into an uneasy slumber.

How long his nap lasted he did not know, but all at once he nodded
violently and awoke.  The fire was low.  Then a muffled rattling noise
at his feet sent the blood in a furious leap to his pulses.

He threw on a rich knot, and as it blazed up his eye fell on an object
that caused him to spring up as if he had been stung.

"Great Caesar!" he exclaimed, and as the rattle sounded once more, he
made a long leap for the doorway.  "That was a narrow escape.  S'pose I
hadn't a woke up?"

Then he shuddered, but recovering, hunted up a cudgel and cautiously
returned within the hut.

There, within a few inches of where the lad's feet had rested as he
slept, was a large rattlesnake still in its coil and giving forth its
ominous rattle.  A dexterous blow or two finished the reptile, but the
odor given forth by the creature in its anger filled the hut.

"Pah!" ejaculated Ralph.  "I must get out of here.  The place would
sicken a dog."

He returned to the open air, now freshened by the vanished rain, and
round to his delight, that a moon several days old was visible in the
west.  The clouds had disappeared, and there seemed every prospect of a
clear and quiet night.

"It is light enough to see to travel if I can only find the road
again," he reflected.  "Anything is better than staying here."

Taking the direction in which it seemed to him that the trail ought to
be, he sought eagerly for the narrow strip of white that would indicate
the wished for goal.  Presently he heard a distant sound.

"It may be the deer a whistling," thought he, listening intently.
"But, no; that ain't made by no deer.  I believe--it's--somebody a
coming along."

Some distance to his left Ralph could now detect a connected sound as
if a tune were being whistled.  In his eager desire for human
companionship, he cast prudence completely aside and ran forward
shouting:

"Hold on!  I'm coming.  Hold on till I get there!"




CHAPTER IV.

The Moonshiners and the Railroad.

The whistling stopped suddenly.  Ralph kept on, however, in the
direction where he had last heard the sounds, and presently
distinguished two dim forms standing in an open space amid the trees,
through which ran the white thread that indicated the lost trail.

"I say," began the lad, "are you fellows going down the mountain?  If
you are, I'd like to go with you.  Fact is, I believe I'm lost."

"Halt, there, young feller!" was the reply, given in sharp, stern
tones.  "One step further and you'll find half an ounce of lead under
your skin, mebbe."

Ralph obeyed, somewhat puzzled and decidedly alarmed.  The men--there
were two of them--drew something over their faces, then ordered the boy
to advance.

He did so, and on drawing near saw that they now wore masks, and had
long sacks swung over their shoulders, with a load of some kind in
either end.  When he saw the masks and the bags Ralph understood at
once what their business was.

"Who are you?" demanded one of the men, and the lad could see that he
held a pistol in one hand.  "No lyin', now!"

"My name is Granger, and I'm from over on Hiawassee River way.  Want to
get down into the low country.  Got lost; stayed in a shack while it
rained, and--here I am."

"Be you a son of old Bras Granger?"

"No; grandson."

The two whispered together a moment, then one of them said:

"I reckon you're all right, boy.  'Taint wuth while to ast our names,
'cause d'ye see--we wouldn't tell."

"You'd be fools if you did," returned Ralph, his self confidence now
fully restored.  "I ain't a wanting to know who you are.  I know
already what you are."

"How's that?" came sharply back, and an ominous click was heard, which,
however, did not seem to alarm Ralph.

"Moonshiners," said the boy briefly.  "Haven't I been raised among 'em?
I've got kin folks as stills regular, I'm sorry to say."

"Sorry!  Ain't it a good trade?"

"Not when it lands you inside of some dirty jail.  Besides, I don't
like the stuff, anyhow."

"No use to offer you a dram then?"

"Not a bit.  But I say, if you'll let me go on with you till we get
down where there's some houses, I'll think more of that than if you
gave me a barrel of whisky."

"We're on our way back.  We're goin' up the mountain.  But you foller
this trail for about a mile, then take the first right hand turn.
Follow that 'twel you come to an old field.  T'other side of that
you'll find the mud pike as runs to Hendersonville.  After that you'll
find houses thick enough.  But where are you bound for after you get
down there?"

"Oh, anywhere most.  I'm after work."

Ralph concluded that he had better not be more explicit with strangers.

The moonshiners soon grew quite friendly and seemed a little hurt over
Ralph's persistence in declining a drink.

"I'm going out among strangers," he said, "and I've got to keep my
head.  The best way to do that is to let the stuff entirely alone.
Well, so long, men.  I'm mighty glad I met up with you."

He struck out down the trail whistling merrily.  Now that he was on the
right road again, and with a clear night before him, he felt far more
cheerful than before.

He found the old field without difficulty, and not far beyond he struck
the Hendersonville pike as the moonshiner had intimated.

Here the country was more open.  Large fields, interspersed with
patches of woodland, were on either hand.  Now and then he would pass a
cabin, his approach being heralded by the barking of dogs.

Once or twice large buildings came into view.  These were the
residences of the more wealthy class of planters.  Even in the dim
starlight, Ralph saw that they were larger than the log dwellings he
was accustomed to.

Finally the moon went down.  He would have stopped at some house and
asked for shelter, but the hour was so late that he shrank from
disturbing strangers.  The night was not uncomfortably cool and he was
getting further on.

Roosters began to crow.  A few clouds glided athwart some of the
brightest stars and he found difficulty in traveling.

Just beyond some buildings he stumbled over something hard and
immovable.  As he picked himself up, his hand came in contact with cold
steel.

Peering closely he saw two long lines running parallel as far as he
could distinguish on either hand.  He found that they were of iron or
steel and rested on wooden supporters, half buried in the earth.

"Dinged if this ain't queer!" he thought.  "Let me see.  I wonder if
this ain't one of them railroads I've heard folks tell about.  They say
it'll carry you as far in one hour as a man'll walk all day."

Pondering over this, to him, puzzling celerity of motion, he groped his
way along the track to where it broadened out into a switch.

"Reckon this one must run somewhere else," thought Ralph, when he
suddenly detected a large dark object ahead.  "What's that, I wonder.
Guess I'll look into that.  Seeing I'm getting into a strange country
it won't do to be too careless."

Going slowly forward, he walked completely round the unknown affair,
which he ascertained was on wheels that rested on the iron tracks.

"This must be one of their wagons they ride so fast in," said the boy
to himself.  "Hello!  The door is open."

It was an ordinary box car on a siding, the sliding door of which was
partially open.  As Ralph strove to peer within, he detected the sound
of measured breathing.

"Some one is in there," he decided, and drew back cautiously.

The darkness had increased greatly and there seemed to be signs of
another rain coming up.  No other place of shelter was in the immediate
neighborhood that he could discern.

He thrust his head into the car and felt with his hands.  Nothing could
he see, nor did he feel aught but the flooring of the car.  While he
debated as to what he should do, the rain began again.

"Gracious!" he exclaimed, "I don't like to go into another man's ranch
like this, but blamed if I am going to get wet, with a shelter within
two feet of me."

He clambered inside and sat with his back against the wall, intending
to get out again after the shower should pass.

But the shower did not pass on.  Instead it settled into a steady
drizzle.  When the rain began to beat inside he drew the door nearly
shut.

The measured breathing came from one end of the car.  There seemed to
be but one occupant besides Ralph.

As the time passed, the lad grew drowsy.  Inured though he was to an
active life, the walking he had done had fatigued him greatly.  Now, as
he sat resting, waiting for the rain to cease, a natural drowsiness
asserted itself with a potency that would not be denied.

As he nodded he awakened himself several times by a violent jerk of the
head, but at last slumber prevailed entirely, and Ralph was sleeping as
soundly as the other unknown occupant of the car.

The unusual events of the last two days had kept his fancies at an
abnormal stretch.  It was natural, therefore, for him to begin dreaming.

It seemed as if he were going back instead of leaving his home.  Every
one he met looked at him compassionately.  Finally he saw Jase Vaughn,
and remembered that he owed Jase five dollars.  He put his hand in his
pocket and drew out--a rattlesnake.

Even this did not waken him, though he thought he was back at the shack
by the tar kiln.  The ground seemed to be covered with snakes.  He ran
ever so far, then all at once he was with Jase just as if he had been
with him all the time.

"I haven't got no money," he said sorrowfully.

"Never mind," replied Vaughn.  "You run home.  Poor fellow; I'm sorry
for you."

Much perplexed, he kept on until he stood before his grandfather's
cabin.  He thought his Aunt Dopples was there, with her eyes red with
weeping.

"Go in; go in," she urged, pushing him through the doorway.  "He's been
waiting for you till he's about give out."

Ralph dreamed that the first thing he saw was his grandfather propped
up in bed, with a ghastly pallor on his face.  When he beheld his
truant grandson, the scowl upon his brow deepened, and he shook a
warning finger.

"Wretched boy!" hissed the old man, while Ralph cowered like one in the
presence of a ghost, "you are no Granger.  There never was a Granger
that acted the coward.  You are a Vaughn--a Vaughn--a Vaughn!"

The old man's tone towards the last rose into such a wild, weird
shriek, that Ralph's blood ran cold.  He attempted to speak with a
tongue so tied by fear that words would not come.

Under the agony of effort he screamed aloud, then suddenly awoke.

"Here!  Here!  Wake up, I say!"

These words, uttered shrilly in his ear, staggered his senses as he
opened his eyes and looked up.




CHAPTER V.

Ralph's First Railroad Ride.

A slender, thin faced, alert looking man was stooping over the boy, and
shaking him vigorously.  Day had dawned.

"Wake up, young fellow!" continued the stranger, as Ralph gazed at him
in a dazed sort of way.  "How came you in here?"

"I--I got in out of the rain," said Ralph, staggering to his feet, only
to be thrown down again by the jolting of the car, which was in rapid
motion.

The sliding door was now open.  Ralph glancing out, saw the landscape
slipping by at a furious rate of speed.

The sight so astonished him, that he sank back again.  To his
unaccustomed senses it was as if the earth were turning upside down.

"What's the matter with you?  Drunk?"

"No!" almost shouted the boy, suddenly indignant.  "I never took a
drink in my life.  Neither was I ever on such a--a wagon as this
before.  Lordy!  How fast we're going!"

The man roared with laughter.

"Well, you are a curiosity.  Where did you come from?  Out of the
woods?"

"I'm from the mountains.  Never was out of them before.  Isn't there no
danger in going so fast?  My!  How my head swims when I look out!"

"Not a bit of danger, unless in case of a collision, or when something
gives way.  But come!  Give me an account of yourself.  When I find an
uninvited stranger aboard my private car, I ought to know something
about him, I reckon."

While Ralph gave a brief account of himself and his affairs--omitting
the feud, however--his eyes rested first on one strange object, then
another.

There was a large pile of canvas at one end of the car, neatly folded.
Several tent poles lay along the floor.  A large and a small camera,
resting on tripods, especially puzzled the boy.  There were also
several chests and a trunk or two.

At the other end of the car there was a cot bedstead with mattress and
bedding, a chair or two, a small table, an oil cooking stove, together
with other household paraphernalia.

The whole outfit was simple, yet complete, and did not take up much
room.

"Well," said the man, as Ralph concluded his statement, "you seem to be
an honest and a plucky lad, though an almighty green one, I guess.
Never been anywhere, you say?"

"I've hunted for miles in the mountains, and I've been to a store or
two, and to meeting, and to the 'lections.  Yes, and I've been to
school three months a year ever since I was so high," Ralph indicated
the height with his hand.  "But grandpa would never let me go off any
very great distance from home."

"So you finally took matters into your own hands and gave him leg bail.
Well, that ain't bad.  But you mustn't go about breaking into people's
houses and cars as you did last night.  It isn't safe."

"I was lost, and it began to rain.  I didn't mean no harm.  I can pay
my way."

He drew forth some money, under a dim idea that he had heard some one
say once, that below the mountains, folks made people pay for about
everything they got.

"Keep your cash, my boy," said the man evidently having a better idea
of Ralph than at first.  "Hold to all you've got.  People are not as
free with their grub and beds down here as they are up in your country.
By the way, what's your name?"

"Ralph Granger.  What might be yours?"

"Mine?  Oh, my name is Quigg--Lemuel Quigg.  I am a traveling
photographer."

"What is that?"

"Did I ever see such ignorance!  Ralph, you are a curiosity.  I take
pictures for a living.  Usually I go by wagon.  But I am bound for the
seacoast, so I hired this car to take me right through."

"There was a fellow up in our parts once as took pictures for two bits
apiece."

"Like these?" Mr. Quigg threw open one lid of a trunk, disclosing a
velvet lined show case filled with photographs of different sizes.

They would now be considered antiquated affairs, but to Ralph the
life-like attitudes and looks of the sitters seemed wonderful.

"Gracious, no!" he exclaimed.  "That fellow only took little tintypes,
as we folks call them.  These beat anything I ever saw."

"Well, suppose we get breakfast," said Quigg, turning to his oil stove.
"We'll be in Hendersonville in an hour.  Can you cook?"

Ralph staggered to the stove, and took a puzzled look.

"I've cooked on a fireplace all my life, more or less.  But I don't
think much of that thing."

"Don't, eh?  Well, well!  You'll do for a dime museum, you will.  Go
and sit down, and watch me."

Ralph took a seat near the door, and divided his time between Mr.
Quigg's culinary operations and the swiftly moving panorama outside.

The dizzy, yet smooth, motion of the car, the--to him--miraculous
speed, the whirl and shimmer of the landscape--all this fascinated him
after his first nervousness wore off.

The artist, however, recalled him from this sort of day dreaming, by
saying:

"Ever make biscuit?"

"We eat corn pones mostly at home."

"Well, you can fry some bacon and eggs, I guess."

He gave the boy a small frying pan, showed him where to place it, then
lighted his lamp.

"That beats pine knots, don't it?" he asked, while Ralph noted with a
new wonder the ease and rapidity with which Mr. Quigg managed
everything.

While the meat and eggs were frying, the artist made coffee, thrust
some potatoes into the oven beside the biscuit, then completed his
morning toilet over a tin basin and a hand mirror.

"Better take a wash and a brush," said he to Ralph.  "I'll dish up the
b