# Simplified Scientific Astrology
Author: Max Heindel
Category: 01_astrologia
Source: Gutenberg #19672
Downloaded: 2026-03-08T14:17:37.361107
AstrologIA Knowledge Base — K2 Sprint
============================================================

Produced by Sam W., Suzanne Shell, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE HOLLADAY CASE

_A TALE_

By

BURTON E. STEVENSON

AUTHOR OF "AT ODDS WITH THE REGENT," "A
SOLDIER OF VIRGINIA," ETC.


NEW YORK
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY
1903


COPYRIGHT, 1903,
BY
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

_Published November, 1903_


THE MERSHON COMPANY PRESS,
RAHWAY, N. J.


[Illustration: MR. ROYCE DELIVERS THE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS.]




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                       PAGE

    I. A BOLT FROM THE BLUE,                     1

   II. IN THE GRIP OF CIRCUMSTANCE,             15

  III. THE COIL TIGHTENS,                       37

   IV. I HAVE AN INSPIRATION,                   56

    V. I DINE WITH A FASCINATING STRANGER,      70

   VI. GODFREY'S PANEGYRIC,                     90

  VII. MISS HOLLADAY BECOMES CAPRICIOUS,       101

 VIII. THE MYSTERIOUS MAID,                    114

   IX. I MEET MONSIEUR MARTIGNY,               131

    X. AN ASTONISHING DISAPPEARANCE,           146

   XI. I UNMASK MY ENEMY,                      165

  XII. AT THE CAFE JOURDAIN,                   183

 XIII. EN VOYAGE,                              197

  XIV. I PROVE A BAD SENTINEL,                 213

   XV. TWO HEADS ARE BETTER THAN ONE,          229

  XVI. I BEARD THE LION,                       247

 XVII. ETRETAT,                                270

XVIII. THE VEIL IS LIFTED,                     280

  XIX. THE END OF THE STORY,                   293




THE HOLLADAY CASE




CHAPTER I

A Bolt from the Blue


The atmosphere of the office that morning was a shade less genial than
usual. We had all of us fought our way downtown through such a storm
of wind, snow, slush, and sleet as is to be found nowhere save in
mid-March New York, and our tempers had suffered accordingly. I had
found a cab unobtainable, and there was, of course, the inevitable jam
on the Elevated, with the trains many minutes behind the schedule. I
was some half-hour late, in consequence, and when I entered the inner
office, I was surprised to find Mr. Graham, our senior, already at his
desk. He nodded good-morning a little curtly.

"I wish you'd look over these papers in the Hurd case, Lester," he
said, and pushed them toward me.

I took them and sat down; and just then the outer door slammed with a
violence extremely unusual.

I had never seen Mr. Royce, our junior, so deeply shaken, so visibly
distracted, as he was when he burst in upon us a moment later, a
newspaper in his hand. Mr. Graham, startled by the noise of his
entrance, wheeled around from his desk and stared at him in
astonishment.

"Why, upon my word, John," he began, "you look all done up. What's the
matter?"

"Matter enough, sir!" and Mr. Royce spread out the paper on the desk
before him. "You haven't seen the morning papers, of course; well,
look at that!" and he indicated with a trembling finger the article
which occupied the first column of the first page--the place of
honor.

I saw our senior's face change as he read the headlines, and he seemed
positively horror-stricken as he ran rapidly through the story which
followed.

"Why, this is the most remarkable thing I ever read!" he burst out at
last.

"Remarkable!" cried the other. "Why, it's a damnable outrage, sir! The
idea that a gentle, cultured girl like Frances Holladay would
deliberately murder her own father--strike him down in cold blood--is
too monstrous, too absolutely preposterous, too--too----" and he
stopped, fairly choked by his emotion.

The words brought me upright in my chair. Frances Holladay accused
of--well!--no wonder our junior was upset!

But Mr. Graham was reading through the article again more carefully,
and while he nodded sympathetically to show that he fully assented to
the other's words, a straight, deep line of perplexity, which I had
come to recognize, formed between his eyebrows.

"Plainly," he said at last, "the whole case hinges on the evidence of
this man Rogers--Holladay's confidential clerk--and from what I know
of Rogers, I should say that he'd be the last man in the world to make
a willful misstatement. He says that Miss Holladay entered her
father's office late yesterday afternoon, stayed there ten minutes,
and then came out hurriedly. A few minutes later Rogers went into the
office and found his employer dead. That's the whole case, but it'll
be a hard one to break."

"Well, it must be broken!" retorted the other, pulling himself
together with a supreme effort. "Of course, I'll take the case."

"Of course!"

"Miss Holladay probably sent for me last night, but I was out at
Babylon, you know, looking up that witness in the Hurd affair. He'll
be all right, and his evidence will give us the case. Our answer in
the Brown injunction can wait till to-morrow. That's all, I think."

The chief nodded.

"Yes--I see the inquest is to begin at ten o'clock. You haven't much
time."

"No--I'd like to have a good man with me," and he glanced in my
direction. "Can you spare me Lester?"

My heart gave a jump. It was just the question I was hoping he would
ask.

"Why, yes, of course," answered the chief readily. "In a case like
this, certainly. Let me hear from you in the course of the day."

Mr. Royce nodded as he started for the door.

"I will; we'll find some flaw in that fellow's story, depend upon it.
Come on, Lester."

I snatched up pen and paper and followed him to the elevator. In a
moment we were in the street; there were cabs in plenty now,
disgorging their loads and starting back uptown again; we hailed one,
and in another moment were rattling along toward our destination with
such speed as the storm permitted. There were many questions surging
through my brain to which I should have welcomed an answer. The storm
had cut off my paper that morning, and I regretted now that I had not
made a more determined effort to get another. A glance at my companion
showed me the folly of attempting to secure any information from his,
so I contented myself with reviewing what I already knew of the
history of the principals.

I knew Hiram W. Holladay, the murdered man, quite well; not only as
every New Yorker knew that multi-millionaire as one of the most
successful operators in Wall Street, but personally as well, since he
had been a client of Graham & Royce for twenty years and more. He was
at that time well on toward seventy years of age, I should say, though
he carried his years remarkably well; his wife had been long dead,
and he had only one child, his daughter, Frances, who must have been
about twenty-five. She had been born abroad, and had spent the first
years of her life there with her mother, who had lingered on the
Riviera and among the hills of Italy and Switzerland in the hope of
regaining a health, which had been failing, so I understood, ever
since her daughter's birth. She had come home at last, bringing the
black-eyed child with her, and within the year was dead.

Holladay's affections from that moment seemed to grow and center about
his daughter, who developed into a tall and beautiful girl--too
beautiful, as was soon apparent, for our junior partner's peace of
mind. He had met her first in a business way, and afterwards socially,
and all of us who had eyes could see how he was eating his heart out
at the knowledge that she was far beyond his reach; for it was evident
that her father deemed her worthy of a brilliant marriage--as, indeed,
she was. I sometimes thought that she held herself at a like value,
for though there was about her a constant crowd of suitors, none of
them, seemingly, could win an atom of encouragement. She was waiting,
I told myself, waiting; and I had even pictured to myself the grim
irony of a situation in which our junior might be called upon to
arrange her marriage settlements.

The cab stopped with a jolt, and I looked up to see that we had
reached the Criminal Courts building. Mr. Royce sprang out, paid the
driver, and ran up the steps to the door, I after him. He turned down
the corridor to the right, and entered the room at the end of it,
which I recognized as the office of Coroner Goldberg. A considerable
crowd had already collected there.

"Has the coroner arrived yet?" my companion asked one of the clerks.

"Yes, sir; he's in his private office."

"Will you take him this card and say that I'd like to see him at once,
if possible?"

The clerk hurried away with the card. He was back again in a moment.

"This way, sir," he called.

We followed him across the room and through a door at the farther
side.

"Ah, Mr. Royce, glad to see you," cried the coroner, as we entered.
"We tried to find you last night, but learned that you were out of
town, and I was just calling up your office again."

"Miss Holladay asked for me, then?"

"Yes, at once. When we found we couldn't get you, we suggested your
senior, but she said she'd wait till you returned."

I could see our junior's face crimson with pleasure.

"You didn't think it necessary to confine her, I trust?" he asked.

"Oh, no; she wasn't disturbed. She spent the night at home--under
surveillance."

"That was right. Of course, it's simply absurd to suspect her."

Goldberg looked at him curiously.

"I don't know, Mr. Royce," he said slowly. "If the evidence turns out
as I think it will, I shall have to hold her--the district attorney
expects it."

Mr. Royce's hands were clutching a chair-back, and they trembled a
little at the coroner's words.

"He'll be present at the examination, then?" he asked.

"Yes, we're waiting for him. You see, it's rather an extraordinary
case."

"Is it?"

"We think so, anyway!" said the coroner, just a trifle impatiently.

I could see the retort which sprang to our junior's lips, but he
choked it back. There was no use offending Goldberg.

"I should like to see Miss Holladay before the examination begins," he
said. "Is she present?"

"She's in the next room, yes. You shall see her, certainly, at once.
Julius, take Mr. Royce to Miss Holladay," he added to the clerk.

I can see her yet, rising from her chair with face alight, as we
entered, and I saw instantly how I had misjudged her. She came a step
toward us, holding out her hands impulsively; then, with an effort,
controlled herself and clasped them before her.

"Oh, but I'm glad to see you!" she cried in a voice so low I could
scarcely hear it. "I've wanted you so much!"

"It was my great misfortune that I could come no sooner," said my
chief, his voice trembling a little despite himself. "I--I scarcely
expected to see you here with no one----"

"Oh," she interrupted, "there was no one I cared to have. My friends
have been very kind--have offered to do anything--but I felt that I
wanted to be just alone and think. I should have liked to have my
maid, but----"

"She's one of the witnesses, I suppose," explained Mr. Royce. "Well,
now that I'm here, I shall stay until I've proved how utterly
ridiculous this charge against you is."

She sank back into her chair and looked up at him with dark, appealing
eyes.

"You think you can?" she asked.

"Can! Certainly I can! Why, it's too preposterous to stand for a
moment! We've only to prove an alibi--to show that you were somewhere
else, you know, at the time the crime was committed--and the whole
business falls to pieces in an instant. You can do that easily, can't
you?"

The color had gone from her cheeks again, and she buried her face in
her hands.

"I don't know," she murmured indistinctly. "I must think. Oh, don't
let it come to that!"

I was puzzled--confounded. With her good name, her life, perhaps, in
the balance, she wanted time to think! I could see that my chief was
astonished, too.

"I'll try to keep it from coming to that, since you wish it," he said
slowly. "I'll not be able to call you, then, to testify in your own
behalf--and that always hurts. But I hope the case will break down at
once--I believe it will. At any rate, don't worry. I want you to rely
on me."

She looked up at him again, smiling.

"I shall," she murmured softly. "I'm sure I could desire no better
champion!"

Well, plainly, if he won this case he would win something else
besides. I think even the policeman in the corner saw it, for he
turned away with a discretion rare in policemen, and pretended to
stare out of the window.

I don't know what my chief would have said--his lips were trembling so
he could not speak for the moment--and just then there came a tap at
the door, and the coroner's clerk looked in.

"We're ready to begin, sir," he said.

"Very well," cried Mr. Royce. "I'll come at once. Good-by for the
moment, Miss Holladay. I repeat, you may rely on me," and he hastened
from the room as confidently as though she had girded him for the
battle. Instead, I told myself, she had bound him hand and foot before
casting him down into the arena.




CHAPTER II

In the Grip of Circumstance


The outer room was crowded from end to end, and the atmosphere reeked
with unpleasant dampness. Only behind the little railing before the
coroner's desk was there breathing space, and we sank into our seats
at the table there with a sigh of relief.

One never realizes how many newspapers there are in New York until one
attends an important criminal case--that brings their people out in
droves and swarms. The reporters took up most of the space in this
small room, paper and pencils were everywhere in evidence, and in one
corner there was a man with a camera stationed, determined, I suppose,
to get a photograph of our client, should she be called to the stand,
since none could be obtained in any other way.

I saw Singleton, the district attorney, come in and sit down near the
coroner, and then the jury filed in from their room and took their
seats. I examined them, man by man, with some little anxiety, but they
all seemed intelligent and fairly well-to-do. Mr. Royce was looking
over their names, and he checked them off carefully as the clerk
called the roll. Then he handed the list up to the coroner with a
little nod.

"Go ahead," he said. "They're all right, I guess--they look all
right."

"It's a good jury," replied the coroner, as he took the paper. "Better
than usual. Are you ready, Mr. Singleton?"

"Yes," said the district attorney. "Oh, wait a minute," he added, and
he got up and came down to our table. "You're going to put Miss
Holladay on the stand, I suppose----"

"And expose her to all this?" and our junior looked around the room.
"Not if I can help it!"

"I don't see how you _can_ help it. An alibi's the only thing that
can save her from being bound over."

"We'll cross that bridge when we come to it," retorted Mr. Royce. "I
think the case against her will soon die of inanition."

"Oh, very well," and Singleton abruptly went back to his desk, biting
his mustache thoughtfully. He had made something of a reputation,
since his election a year before, as a solver of abstruse criminal
problems, and had secured a conviction in two or three capital cases
which had threatened for a time to baffle the police. He evidently
scented something of the same kind here, or he would have entrusted
the case to one of his assistants. It might be added that, while his
successes had made him immensely popular with the multitude, there had
been, about one or two of them, a hint of unprofessional conduct,
which had made his brethren of the bar look rather askance at him.

He nodded to the coroner after a moment, the room was called to
order, and the first witness summoned.

It was Rogers, the confidential clerk. I knew Rogers, of course, had
talked with him often in a business way, and had the highest respect
for him. He had been with Mr. Holladay much longer than I had been
with Graham & Royce, and had, as Mr. Graham had pointed out, an
unimpeachable reputation.

There were the usual preliminaries, name, age, residence, and so on,
Coroner Goldberg asking the questions. He was a really good
cross-examiner, and soon came to the core of the matter.

"What is the position of your desk in Mr. Holladay's office?" he
asked.

"There is an outer office for the clerks; opening from that, a smaller
room where my desk is placed. Opening from my room was Mr. Holladay's
private office.

"Had Mr. Holladay's office any other door?"

"No, sir."

"Could entrance be had by the windows?"

"The windows open on the street side of the building. We occupy a part
of the eighth floor."

"The fire-escapes----"

"Are at the back of the building--there are none on the street
side--nothing but a sheer wall."

"So that anyone entering or leaving the private office must
necessarily pass by your desk?"

"Necessarily; yes, sir."

"Could anyone pass without your seeing him?"

"No, sir; that would be quite impossible."

The coroner leaned back in his chair. There was one point settled.

"Now, Mr. Rogers," he said, "will you kindly tell us, in your own way
and with as much detail as possible, exactly what happened at your
office shortly before five o'clock yesterday afternoon?"

I could see that Rogers was deeply moved. His face was very white, he
moistened his lips nervously from time to time, and his hands grasped
convulsively the arms of his chair. Plainly, the task before him was
far from an agreeable one.

"Well, sir," he began, "we had a very busy day yesterday, and were at
the office considerably later than usual; but by five o'clock we had
closed up work for the day, and all the other clerks, with the
exception of the office-boy, had gone home. I had made some notes from
Mr. Holladay's dictation, and had returned to my desk to arrange them,
when the outer door opened and Mr. Holladay's daughter came in. She
asked me whether her father was engaged, and upon my saying no, opened
the inner door and entered his office. She remained, I should think,
about ten minutes; then she came out again, walked rapidly past
without looking at me, and, I suppose, left the building. I finished
arranging my notes, and then entered Mr. Holladay's office to ask if
he had any further instructions for me, and I found him lying forward
on his desk, with a knife sticking in his neck and the blood spurting
out. I summoned aid, but he died without regaining consciousness--I
should say he was practically dead when I found him."

I felt, rather than heard, the little stir which ran through the room.
There was an indefinable horror in the story and in the conclusion to
which it inevitably led.

"Now, let us go back a moment," said the coroner, as Rogers stopped
and mopped his forehead feverishly. "I want the jury to understand
your story thoroughly. Mr. Holladay had been dictating to you?"

"Yes."

"And was quite well?"

"Yes--as well as usual. He'd been suffering with indigestion for some
time past."

"Still he was able to attend to business?"

"Oh, yes, sir. There was nothing at all serious in his illness."

"You then left his office and returned to your own. How long had you
been there before the outer door opened?"

"Not over five minutes."

"And who was it entered?"

"Miss Frances Holladay--the daughter of my employer."

"You're quite sure? You know her well?"

"Very well. I've known her for many years. She often drove to the
office in the evening to take her father home. I supposed that was
what she came for yesterday."

"You looked at her attentively?"

Rogers hitched impatiently in his chair.

"I glanced at her, as I always do," he said. "I didn't stare."

"But you're quite sure it was Miss Holladay?"

"Absolutely sure, sir. Good God!" he cried, his nerves giving way for
an instant, "do you suppose I'd make an assertion like that if I
wasn't absolutely sure?"

"No," said the coroner soothingly; "no, I don't suppose any such
thing, not for a moment, Mr. Rogers; only I want the jury to see how
certain the identification is. Shall I proceed?"

"Go ahead, sir," said Rogers. "I'll try to hold myself together a
little better, sir."

"I can see what a strain this is for you," said the coroner kindly;
"and I'll spare you as much as I can. Now, after Miss Holladay entered
the inner office, how long did she remain there?"

"About ten minutes, I should say; not longer than that, certainly."

"Did you hear any sound of conversation, or any unusual noise of any
kind?"

"No, sir. It would have been a very unusual noise to be audible. Mr.
Holladay's office has heavy walls and a double door which completely
shut off all sounds from within."

"Miss Holladay then came out?"

"Yes, sir."

"And walked past you?"

"Yes, sir; walked past me rapidly."

"Did you not think that peculiar?"

"Why, sir, she didn't often stop to speak to me. I was busy and so
thought nothing particularly about it."

"Did you notice her face? Did she seem perturbed?"

"No, sir; I didn't notice. I just glanced up and bowed. In fact, I
didn't see her face at all, for she had lowered her veil."

"Her veil!" repeated the coroner. "You hadn't mentioned that she wore
a veil."

"No, sir; when she came into the office she had lifted it up over her
hat-brim--you know how women do."

"Yes--so you saw her face distinctly when she entered?"

"Yes, sir."

"But when she went out, she had lowered her veil. Was it a heavy one?"

"Why, sir," the witness hesitated, "just an ordinary veil, I should
say."

"But still heavy enough to conceal her face?"

"Oh, yes, sir."

The coroner nodded. "Now, Mr. Rogers, how long a time elapsed after
the departure of the woman before you went back into the inner
office?"

"Not more than three or four minutes. I thought perhaps Mr. Holladay
was getting ready to accompany his daughter, and I didn't wish to
detain him."

"And you found him, as you say, lying forward across his desk with a
knife in his throat and the blood spurting out. Did you recognize the
knife?"

"Yes, sir. It was his knife--a knife he kept lying on his desk to
sharpen pencils with and erase and so on."

"Sharp, was it?"

"It had one long blade, very sharp, sir."

The coroner picked up a knife that was lying on the desk before him.

"Is this the knife?" he asked.

Rogers looked at it carefully.

"That's the knife, sir," he said, and it was passed to the jury. When
they had finished with it, Mr. Royce and I examined it. It was an
ordinary one-bladed erasing knife with ivory handle. It was open, the
blade being about two inches and a half in length, and, as I soon
convinced myself, very sharp indeed.

"Will you describe Mr. Holladay's position?" continued the coroner.

"He was lying forward on the desk, with his arms outstretched and his
head to one side."

"And there was a great deal of blood?"

"Oh, a great deal! Someone, apparently, had attempted to check it,
for a little distance away there was a handkerchief soaked in blood."

The coroner picked up a handkerchief and handed it to the witness.

"Is that the handkerchief?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," said Rogers, after a moment.

"Is it a man's or a woman's handkerchief?"

"Oh, a woman's undoubtedly."

The jury examined it and so did we. It was a small square of fine
cambric with no mark that I could see, soaked through and through with
blood--unquestionably a woman's handkerchief. Then Rogers told the
rest of the story--how he had summoned aid and informed the police.

"Now, Mr. Rogers," said the coroner, when he had finished, "there is
one point more. Has there been anything in your knowledge of Mr.
Holladay or his business to suggest the idea of suicide?"

The witness shook his head decidedly.

"Nothing whatever, sir," he said positively. "His business was
prospering; he was happy and contented--why, he was planning for a
trip abroad with his daughter."

"Let us suppose for a moment," continued Goldberg, "that he did
actually stab himself in his daughter's presence; what would you
naturally expect her to do?"

"I should expect her to give the alarm--to summon aid," replied
Rogers.

"Certainly--unquestionably," and Goldberg nodded to my chief. "I turn
the witness over to you, Mr. Royce," he said.

"Now, Mr. Rogers," began our junior impressively, "you know, of
course, that this whole case hinges, at present, on your
identification of the woman who, presumably, was in Mr. Holladay's
office when he was stabbed. I want to be very sure of that
identification. Will you tell me how she was dressed?"

The witness paused for a moment's thought.

"She wore a dress of very dark red," he said at last, "with some sort
of narrow dark trimming--black, possibly. That's all I can tell you
about it."

"And the hat?"

"I didn't notice the hat, sir. I only glanced at her."

"But in that glance, Mr. Rogers, did you see nothing unusual--nothing
which suggested to your mind that possibly it might not be Miss
Holladay?"

"Nothing, sir."

"Some change of demeanor, perhaps; of expression?"

The witness hesitated.

"I thought she was looking not quite so well as usual," he said
slowly. "She seemed a little pale and worried."

"Ah! It was dark in the office, was it not, at five o'clock yesterday
afternoon?"

"We had turned on the lights half an hour before, sir."

"Is your office well lighted?"

"I have a light over my desk, sir, and there's another on the wall."

"So you could not see your visitor's face with absolute clearness?"

"No, sir; but quite clearly enough to recognize her," he added
doggedly.

"Yet you thought her looking pale and worried."

"Yes, sir; that was my impression."

"And when she asked for Mr. Holladay, did she use the words 'my
father,' as your evidence would suggest?"

Again the witness hesitated in the effort at recollection.

"No, sir," he answered finally. "Her words, I think, were, 'Is Mr.
Holladay engaged at present?'"

"It was Miss Holladay's voice?"

"I could not say, sir," answered the witness, again mopping the
perspiration from his forehead. "I have no wish to incriminate Miss
Holladay unnecessarily. I'm not sufficiently well acquainted with her
voice to swear to it."

"Well, when you answered her question in the negative, did she
hesitate before entering the private office?"

"No, sir; she went straight to it."

"Is there any lettering on the door?"

"Oh, yes, the usual lettering, 'Private Office.'"

"So that, even if she were not acquainted with the place, she might
still have seen where to go?"

"Yes, sir; I suppose so."

"And you stated, too, I believe, that you could have heard no sound of
an altercation in the private office, had one occurred?"

"No, sir; I could have heard nothing."

"You have been with Mr. Holladay a long time, I believe, Mr. Rogers?"

"Over thirty years, sir."

"And you are intimately acquainted with his affairs?"

"Yes, sir."

"Now, Mr. Rogers, have you ever, in all these years, ran across
anything--any item of expenditure, any correspondence, anything
whatever--which would lead you to think that Mr. Holladay was a victim
of blackmail, or that he had ever had a liaison with a woman?"

"No, sir!" cried the witness. "No, sir! I'm willing to swear that such
a thing is not possible. I should inevitably have found it out had it
existed."

"That will do for the present," said Mr. Royce. "I shall want to
recall the witness, however, sir."

The coroner nodded, and Rogers stepped down, still trembling from the
effects of his last outburst. I confess that, for my part, I thought
we were very deep in the mire.

The office-boy was called next, but added nothing to the story. He
had gone to the chute to mail some letters; the woman must have
entered the office while he was away. He saw her come out again, but,
of course, did not see her face. He had been employed recently, and
did not know Miss Holladay.

Then the physicians who had attended the dead man were called, and
testified that the knife-blade had penetrated the left carotid artery,
and that he had bled to death--was dead, indeed, before they reached
him. It would take, perhaps, ten minutes to produce such an effusion
of blood as Rogers had noticed--certainly more than five, so that the
blow must have been struck before the woman left the inner office.

The policeman who had responded to the alarm testified that he had
examined the windows, and that they were both bolted on the inside,
precluding the possibility of anyone swinging down from above or
clambering up from below. Nothing in the office had been disturbed.
There was other evidence of an immaterial nature, and then Miss
Holladay's maid was called.

"Was your mistress away from home yesterday afternoon?" asked the
coroner.

"Yes, sir; she had the carriage ordered for three o'clock. She was
driven away shortly after that."

"And what time did she return?"

"About six, sir; just in time to dress for dinner."

"Did you notice anything unusual in her demeanor when she returned?"

The maid hesitated, fearing doubtless that she might say too much.

"Miss Holladay had complained of a headache in the morning," she said,
after a moment. "She was looking badly when she went out, and the
drive made her worse instead of better. She seemed very nervous and
ill. I advised her to lie down and not dress for dinner, but she would
not listen. She always dined with her father, and did not wish to
disappoint him. She was in a great hurry, fearing that he'd get back
before she was ready."

"There's no doubt in your mind that she was really expecting him?"

"Oh, no, sir; she even went to the door to look for him when he did
not come. She seemed very uneasy about him."

That was one point in our favor certainly.

"And when the news of her father's death reached her, how did she bear
it?"

"She didn't bear it at all, sir," answered the maid, catching her
breath to choke back a sob. "She fainted dead away. Afterwards, she
seemed to be in a kind of daze till the doctor came."

"That is all. Have you any questions to ask the witness, Mr. Royce?"

"Only one," said my chief, leaning forward. I knew what it was, and
held my breath, wondering whether it were wise to ask it. "Do you
remember the gown your mistress wore yesterday afternoon?" he
questioned.

"Oh, yes, sir," and the witness brightened. "It was a dark red
broadcloth, made very plain, with only a little narrow black braid for
trimming."




CHAPTER III

The Coil Tightens


From the breathless silence that followed her answer, she saw that she
had somehow dealt her mistress a heavy blow, and the sobs burst out
beyond control, choking her. I could see how my chief's face turned
livid. He had driven another rivet in the chain--just the one it
needed to hold it firmly together. My head was whirling. Could it be
possible, after all, that this gentle, cultured girl was really such a
fiend at heart that she could strike down.... I put the thought from
me. It was monstrous, unbelievable!

The coroner and the district attorney were whispering together, and I
saw the former glance from the blood-stained handkerchief on the desk
before him to the sobbing woman on the stand. It needed only that--her
identification of that square of cambric--to complete the evidence.
He hesitated a moment, said another word or two to Singleton, then
straightened up again in his chair. Perhaps he thought the chain was
strong enough; perhaps he saw only that the witness was in no
condition to go on.

"Anything further, Mr. Royce?" he asked.

"Not at present, sir," answered our junior hoarsely. I think he was
just beginning fully to realize how desperate our case was.

"We will dismiss the witness, then, temporarily," said the coroner.
"We shall probably recall her later on."

The maid was led back to the witness room on the verge of hysteria,
and Goldberg looked over the papers on his desk.

"We have one more witness," he said at last, "Miss Holladay's
coachman, and perhaps a little testimony in rebuttal. If you wish to
adjourn for lunch, Mr. Royce, I'm quite ready to do so."

"Thank you, sir," said my chief, welcoming any opportunity to pull
himself together and prepare a plan of defense. "I _do_ wish it."

"Very well, then; we'll adjourn till two o'clock," and he pushed back
his chair.

"May I have one word with you, sir?" asked Mr. Royce.

"Certainly."

"I should like to see Miss Holladay a few moments in private. We wish,
of course, to arrange our rebuttal."

The coroner looked at him for a moment with eyes in which just a tinge
of curiosity flickered.

"I'll be very glad to allow you to see her in private," he answered
readily. "I regret greatly that we couldn't find you last night, so
that you could have opportunity to prepare for this hearing. I feel
that, in a way, we haven't been quite fair to you, though I don't see
how delay could have altered matters, and, in a case of this kind,
prompt action is important. I had no intention of placing Miss
Holladay on the witness stand, so I thought it best to proceed at once
with the inquest. You must admit, sir, that, as the case stands,
there's only one course open to me."

"I fear so," assented the other sadly. "It's a most incomprehensible
case. The chain of evidence seems absolutely complete, and yet I'm
convinced--as every sane man must be--that there is in it some fatal
flaw, which, once discovered, will send the whole structure tottering.
It must be my business to find that flaw."

"Strange things happen in this world, Mr. Royce," observed Singleton
with a philosophy born of experience.

"The impossible never happens, sir!" retorted our junior. "I hope to
show you that this belongs in that category."

"Well, I hope you will," said the district attorney. "I'd be glad to
find that someone else is guilty."

"I'll do my best," and Mr. Royce turned to me. "Lester, you'd better
go and get some lunch. You look quite done up."

"Shall I bring you something?" I asked. "Or, better still, have a meal
ready for you in half an hour? Rotin's is just around the corner."

He would have refused, I think, had not the coroner interfered.

"You'd better go, Mr. Royce," he said. "You're looking done up
yourself. Perhaps you can persuade Miss Holladay to eat something. I'm
sure she needs it."

"Very well, then; have two meals ready in half an hour, Lester," he
said, "and a lunch we can bring back with us. I'll go to Miss Holladay
now, and then come direct to Rotin's."

He hurried away after the coroner, and I walked slowly over to Rotin's
to give the necessary orders. I chose a table in a snug corner, picked
up a paper, and tried to read. Its one great item of news was the
Holladay case, and I grew hot with anger, as I saw how unquestioningly,
how complacently, it accepted the theory of the daughter's guilt.
Still, I asked myself, was it to blame? Was anyone to blame for
thinking her guilty after hearing the evidence? How could one escape
it? Why, even I----

Preposterous! I tried to reason calmly; to find an opening in the net.
Yet, how complete it was! The only point we had gained, so far, was
that the mysterious visitor had asked for Mr. Holladay, not for her
father--and what an infinitesimal point it was! Supposing there had
been a quarrel, an estrangement, would not she naturally have used
those very words? After all, did not the black eyes, the full lips,
the deep-colored cheeks bespeak a strong and virile temperament, depth
of emotion, capacity for swift and violent anger? But what cause could
there be for a quarrel so bitter, so fierce, that it should lead to
such a tragedy? What cause? And then, suddenly, a wave of light broke
in upon me. There could be only one--yes, but there _could_ be one!
Capacity for emotion meant capacity for passion. If she had a lover,
if she had clung to him despite her father! I knew his reputation for
severity, for cold and relentless condemnation. Here was an
explanation, certainly!

And then I shook myself together angrily. Here was I, reasoning along
the theory of her guilt--trying to find a motive for it! I remembered
her as I had seen her often, driving with her father; I recalled the
many stories I had heard of their devotion; I reflected how her whole
life, so far as I knew it, pointed to a nature singularly calm and
self-controlled, charitable and loving. As to the lover theory, did
not the light in her eyes which had greeted our junior disprove that,
at once and forever? Certainly, there was some fatal flaw in the
evidence, and it was for us to find it.

I leaned my head back against the wall with a little sigh of relief.
What a fool I had been! Of course, we should find it! Mr. Royce had
spoken the words, the district attorney had pointed out the way. We
had only to prove an alibi! And the next witness would do it. Her
coachman had only to tell where he had driven her, at what places she
had stopped, and the whole question would be settled. At the hour the
crime was committed, she had doubtless been miles away from Wall
Street! So the question would be settled--settled, too, without the
necessity of Miss Holladay undergoing the unpleasant ordeal of
cross-examination.

"It is a most extraor-rdinary affair," said a voice at my elbow, and I
turned with a start to see that the chair just behind me had been
taken by a man who was also reading an account of the crime. He laid
the paper down, and caught my eye. "A most extraor-rdinary affair!" he
repeated, appealing to me.

I nodded, merely glancing at him, too preoccupied to notice him
closely. I got an impression of a florid face, of a stout,
well-dressed body, of an air unmistakably French.

"You will pardon me, sir," he added, leaning a little forward. "As a
stranger in this country, I am much inter-rested in your processes of
law. This morning I was present at the trial--I per-rceived you there.
It seemed to me that the young lady was in--what you call--a tight
place."

He spoke English very well, with an accent of the slightest. I glanced
at him again, and saw that his eyes were very bright and that they
were fixed upon me intently.

"It does seem so," I admitted, loth to talk, yet not wishing to be
discourteous.

"The ver' thing I said to myself!" he continued eagerly. "The--what
you call--coe-encidence of the dress, now!"

I did not answer; I was in no humor to discuss the case.

"You will pardon me," he repeated persuasively, still leaning forward,
"but concer-rning one point I should like much to know. If she is
thought guilty what will occur?"

"She will be bound over to the grand jury," I explained.

"That is, she will be placed in prison?"

"Of course."

"But, as I understand your law, she may be released by bondsmen."

"Not in a capital case," I said; "not in a case of this kind, where
the penalty may be death."

"Ah, I see," and he nodded slowly. "She would then not be again
released until after she shall have been proved innocent. How great a
time would that occupy?"

"I can't say--six months--a year, perhaps."

"Ah, I see," he said again, and drained a glass of absinthe he had
been toying with. "Thank you, ver' much, sir."

He arose and went slowly out, and I noted the strength of his figure,
the short neck----

The waiter came with bread and butter, and I realized suddenly that it
was long past the half-hour. Indeed, a glance at my watch showed me
that nearly an hour had gone. I waited fifteen minutes longer, ate
what I could, and, taking a box-lunch under my arm, hurried back to
the coroner's office. As I entered it, I saw a bowed figure sitting at
the table, and my heart fell as I recognized our junior. His whole
attitude expressed a despair absolute, past redemption.

"I've brought your lunch, Mr. Royce," I said, with what lightness I
could muster. "The proceedings will commence in half an hour--you'd
better eat something," and I opened the box.

He looked at it for a moment, and then began mechanically to eat.

"You look regularly done up," I ventured. "Wouldn't I better get you
a glass of brandy? That'll tone you up."

"All right," he assented listlessly, and I hurried away on the errand.

The brandy brought a little color back to his cheeks, and he began to
eat with more interest.

"Must I order lunch for Miss Holladay?" I questioned.

"No," he said. "She said she didn't wish any."

He relapsed again into silence. Plainly, he had received some new blow
during my absence.

"After all," I began, "you know we've only to prove an alibi to knock
to pieces this whole house of cards."

"Yes, that's all," he agreed. "But suppose we can't do it, Lester?"

"Can't do it?" I faltered. "Do you mean----?"

"I mean that Miss Holladay positively refuses to say where she spent
yesterday afternoon."

"Does she understand the--the necessity?" I asked.

"I pointed it out to her as clearly as I could. I'm all at sea,
Lester."

Well, if even he were beginning to doubt, matters were indeed serious!

"It's incomprehensible!" I sighed, after a moment's confused thought.
"It's----"

"Yes--past believing."

"But the coachman----"

"The coachman's evidence, I fear, won't help us much--rather the
reverse."

I actually gasped for breath--I felt like a drowning man from whose
grasp the saving rope had suddenly, unaccountably, been snatched.

"In that case----" I began, and stopped.

"Well, in that case?"

"We must find some other way out," I concluded lamely.

"_Is_ there another way, Lester?" he demanded, wheeling round upon me
fiercely. "_Is_ there another way? If there is, I wish to God you'd
show it to me!"

"There must be!" I protested desperately, striving to convince myself.
"There must be; only, I fear, it will take some little time to find."

"And meanwhile, Miss Holladay will be remanded! Think what that will
mean to her, Lester!"

I had thought. I was desperate as he--but to find the flaw, the weak
spot in the chain, required, I felt, a better brain than mine. I was
lost in a whirlwind of perplexities.

"Well, we must do our best," he went on more calmly, after a moment.
"I haven't lost hope yet--chance often directs these things. Besides,
at worst, I think Miss Holladay will change her mind. Whatever her
secret, it were better to reveal it than to spend a single hour in the
Tombs. She simply _must_ change her mind! And thanks, Lester, for
your thoughtfulness. You've put new life into me."

I cleared away the debris of the lunch, and a few moments later the
room began to fill again. At last the coroner and district attorney
came in together, and the former rapped for order.

"The inquest will continue," he said, "with the examination of John
Brooks, Miss Holladay's coachman."

I can give his evidence in two words. His mistress had driven directly
down the avenue to Washington Square. There she had left the carriage,
bidding him wait for her, and had continued southward into the squalid
French quarter. He had lost sight of her in a moment, and had driven
slowly about for more than two hours before she reappeared. She had
ordered him to drive home as rapidly as he could, and he had not
stopped until he reached the house. Her gown? Yes, he had noticed that
it was a dark red. He had not seen her face, for it was veiled. No,
he had never before driven her to that locality.

Quaking at heart, I realized that only one person could extricate
Frances Holladay from the coil woven about her. If she persisted in
silence, there was no hope for her. But that she should still refuse
to speak was inconceivable, unless----

"That is all," said the coroner. "Will you cross-examine the witness,
Mr. Royce?"

My chief shook his head silently, and Brooks left the stand.

Again the coroner and Singleton whispered together.

"We will recall Miss Holladay's maid," said the former at last.

She was on the stand again in a moment, calmer than she had been, but
deadly pale.

"Are your mistress's handkerchiefs marked in any way?" Goldberg asked,
as she turned to him.

"Some of them are, yes, sir, with her initials, in the form of a
monogram. Most of them are plain."

"Do you recognize this one?" and he handed her the ghastly piece of
evidence.

I held my breath while the woman looked it over, turning it with
trembling fingers.

"No, sir!" she replied emphatically, as she returned it to him.

"Does your mistress possess any handkerchiefs that resemble this one?"

"Oh, yes, sir; it's an ordinary cambric handkerchief of good quality
such as most ladies use."

I breathed a long sigh of relief; here, at least, fortune favored us.

"That is all. Have you any questions, Mr. Royce?"

Again our junior shook his head.

"That concludes our case," added the coroner. "Have you any witnesses
to summon, sir?"

What witnesses could we have? Only one--and I fancied that the jurymen
were looking at us expectantly. If our client were indeed innocent,
why should we hesitate to put her on the stand, to give her
opportunity to defend herself, to enable her to shatter, in a few
words, this chain of circumstance so firmly forged about her? If she
were innocent, would she not naturally wish to speak in her own
behalf? Did not her very unwillingness to speak argue----

"Ask for a recess," I whispered. "Go to Miss Holladay, and tell her
that unless she speaks----"

But before Mr. Royce could answer, a policeman pushed his way forward
from the rear of the room and handed a note to the coroner.

"A messenger brought this a moment ago, sir," he explained.

The coroner glanced at the superscription and handed it to my chief.

"It's for you, Mr. Royce," he said.

I saw that the address read,

     For Mr. Royce,
        Attorney for the Defense.

He tore it open, and ran his eyes rapidly over the inclosure. He read
it through a second time, then held out the paper to me with an
expression of the blankest amazement. The note read:

     The man Rogers is lying. The woman who was with
     Holladay wore a gown of dark green.




CHAPTER IV

I Have an Inspiration


I stared at the lines in dumb bewilderment. "The man Rogers is lying."
But what conceivable motive could he have for lying? Besides, as I
looked at him on the stand, I would have sworn that he was telling the
truth, and very much against his will. I had always rather prided
myself upon my judgment of human nature--had I erred so egregiously in
this instance? "The woman who was with Holladay wore a gown of dark
green." Who was the writer of the note? How did he know the color of
her gown? There was only one possible way he could know--he knew the
woman. Plainly, too, he must have been present at the morning hearing.
But if he knew so much, why did he not himself come forward? To this,
too, there was but one answer--he must be an accomplice. But then,
again, if he were an accomplice, why should he imperil himself by
writing this note, for it could very probably be traced? I found
myself deeper in the mire, farther from the light, at every step.

"Do you wish to summon any witnesses, Mr. Royce?" asked the coroner
again. "I shall be glad to adjourn the hearing until to-morrow if you
do."

Mr. Royce roused himself with an effort.

"Thank you, sir," he said. "I may ask you to do that later on. Just at
present, I wish to recall Mr. Rogers."

"Very well," said the coroner, and Rogers was summoned from the
witness room.

I looked at him attentively, trying to fathom his thoughts, to read
behind his eyes; but look as I might, I could see nothing in his face
save concern and grief. He had grown gray in Holladay's office; he had
proved himself, a hundred times, a man to be relied on; he had every
reason to feel affection and gratitude toward his employer, and I was
certain that he felt both; he received a liberal salary, I knew, and
was comfortably well-to-do.

That he himself could have committed the crime or been concerned in it
in any way was absolutely unthinkable. Yet why should he lie? Above
all, why should he seek to implicate his employer's daughter? Even if
he wished to implicate her, how could he have known the color of her
gown? What dark, intricate problem was this that confronted us?

In the moment that followed, I saw that Mr. Royce was studying him,
too, was straining to find a ray of light for guidance. If we failed
now----

I read the note through again--"a gown of dark green"--and suddenly,
by a kind of clairvoyance, the solution of the mystery leaped forth
from it. I leaned over to my chief, trembling with eagerness.

"Mr. Royce," I whispered hoarsely, "I believe I've solved the puzzle.
Hold Rogers on the stand a few moments until I get back."

He looked up at me astonished; then nodded, as I seized my hat, and
pushed my way through the crowd. Once outside the building, I ran to
the nearest dry-goods house--three blocks away it was, and what
fearfully long blocks they seemed!--then back again to the courtroom.
Rogers was still on the stand, but a glance at Mr. Royce told me that
he had elicited nothing new.

"You take him, Lester," he said, as I sat down beside him. "I'm worn
out."

Quivering with apprehension, I arose. It was the first time I had been
given the center of the stage in so important a case. Here was my
opportunity! Suppose my theor